Niikura et al. Journal of Medical Case Reports  (2015) 9:103 
DOI 10.1186/s13256-015-0590-z

JOURNAL OF MEDICAL
CASE REPORTS

CA SE R EP O R T
Open Access
Rare non-traumatic periprosthetic femoral fracture
with features of an atypical femoral fracture: a case
report
Takahiro Niikura1*, Sang Yang Lee1, Yoshitada Sakai2, Ryosuke Kuroda1 and Masahiro Kurosaka1

Abstract

Introduction: Atypical femoral fractures have emerged as one of the potential complications of bisphosphonates
during the past decade. The American Society for Bone and Mineral Research published a Task Force report on
atypical femoral fractures in 2010 and a second report in 2014. Although the current definition of atypical femoral
fractures in these reports excludes periprosthetic fractures, each of three published case reports describe a
bisphosphonate-associated atypical femoral fracture that occurred around the stem of a total hip arthroplasty. We
report a rare case of an atypical femoral fracture that occurred at the stem tip of a total hip arthroplasty that fulfills
the major criteria defined by the second American Society for Bone and Mineral Research Task Force report for an
atypical femoral fracture and that was associated with prolonged use of bisphosphonate.
Case presentation: A 69-year-old Japanese woman with a right cementless total hip arthroplasty undertaken 44
months previously had a right femoral shaft fracture that occurred without trauma. She related that the bone
fractured while she was standing, after which she fell down. Radiographs showed a noncomminuted transverse
fracture located at the tip of the stem with localized periosteal thickening of the lateral cortex. The fracture was
complete, extending through both cortices, and was associated with a medial spike. Her history revealed that she
had been taking prednisolone to treat dermatomyositis and interstitial pneumonia for approximately 15 years.
Alendronate was administered for more than 7 years. We performed open reduction and internal fixation using a
locking plate with cable grip. The latest follow-up was performed 2 years after the fracture surgery. Bony union
was successful. She regained the ability to walk, although her activity was limited by her comorbidities.
Conclusions: Although the current definition of an atypical femoral fracture excludes periprosthetic fractures,
there may be a periprosthetic fracture with the same or similar pathology as that of an atypical femoral fracture.
We must be vigilant and aware of this type of fracture, especially in patients with prolonged bisphosphonate use.
Keywords: Atypical femoral fracture, Bisphosphonate, Dermatomyositis, Glucocorticoid, Periprosthetic fracture

Introduction
Atypical femoral fractures (AFFs) have emerged as one
of the potential complications of bisphosphonates during
the past decade [1,2]. The American Society for Bone
and Mineral Research (ASBMR) published a Task Force
report on AFFs in 2010 [1] and a second report in 2014
[2]. Although the current definition of AFFs in these
reports excludes periprosthetic fractures [1,2], each of
three published case reports describe a bisphosphonate-

* Correspondence: tniikura@med.kobe-u.ac.jp
1Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Kobe University Graduate School of
Medicine, 7-5-1 Kusunoki-cho, Chuo-ku, Kobe 650-0017, Japan
Full list of author information is available at the end of the article

associated AFF that occurred around the stem of a total
hip arthroplasty (THA) [3-5]. We report a rare case of
an AFF that occurred at the stem tip of a THA that ful-
fills the major criteria defined by the second ASBMR
Task Force report for an AFF and that was associated
with prolonged use of bisphosphonate.

Case presentation
A 69-year-old Japanese woman with a right cementless
THA undertaken 44 months previously had a right femoral
shaft fracture. She recalled that she experienced acute
pain in her right thigh while standing. She believed that

© 2015 Niikura et al.; licensee BioMed Central. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and
reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly credited. The Creative Commons Public Domain
Dedication waiver (http://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/) applies to the data made available in this article,
unless otherwise stated.

Niikura et al. Journal of Medical Case Reports  (2015) 9:103 

Page 2 of 5

the fracture occurred at that point in time, after which
she fell down. Thus, it was not a result of trauma.

Radiographs (Figure 1) showed a noncomminuted
transverse fracture located at the tip of the stem as well
as localized periosteal thickening of the lateral cortex in
the distal fragment. The fracture was complete, extend-
ing through both cortices, and was associated with a
medial spike in the proximal fragment. There was no ap-
parent loosening of the THA components. A radiograph
taken at the 3-year follow-up of THA (8 months before
the fracture) shows no abnormal findings (Figure 2).

At 15 years prior to this episode she had been diag-
nosed with dermatomyositis and subsequently developed
interstitial pneumonia. Prednisolone and immunosup-
pressants (azathioprine, cyclosporine, tacrolimus) were
used to treat her dermatomyositis and interstitial pneu-
monia. She had been on home oxygen therapy for the
past 3 years. THA of her right hip had been performed
to treat hip joint destruction caused by avascular necro-
sis of the femoral head induced by steroid use.

At admission, her height was 153.5cm, and she weighed
41kg. Her body mass index was 17.4kg/m2. She was a

Figure 1 Radiographs demonstrate a periprosthetic femoral fracture
with major radiographic features of an atypical femoral fracture.
Note the localized periosteal thickening of the lateral cortex (black
arrow) and the medial spike (white arrow).

Figure 2 Radiograph taken at the 3-year follow-up of total hip
arthroplasty (8 months before the fracture) showing no abnormal
findings.

prior smoker, having stopped 21 years ago. She did not
drink alcohol. She had other past medical histories. Hemi-
thyroidectomy was performed for a thyroid tumor 23
years ago, and she took thyroid hormone preparation. She
also had necrotizing fasciitis of the anterior cervical region
that had spread from a gingival abscess 7 months ago. In
addition, she underwent total hysterectomy, although she
did not remember exactly when it took place. She had
been taking an anti-hypertension drug and an H2 blocker
for some time.

She had been on alendronate for at least 7 years. Her
oral surgeon discontinued it 7 months prior to this frac-
ture. It was replaced by activated vitamin D and vitamin
K to treat her osteoporosis. The bone mineral density
examined after the fracture of the left femoral neck was
0.644g/cm2, which is 82% of the young adult mean.
Radiographs and magnetic resonance imaging revealed
no abnormalities in her contralateral femur.

We performed open reduction and internal

fixation
using a locking plate. We chose a reversed locking com-
pression plate for the distal
femur (LCP-DF; Synthes,
Tokyo, Japan) for the contralateral side and an LCP cable
system (Synthes). We judged that some fracture gap
remained after the reduction and fixation, and so placed a
small amount of β-tricalcium phosphate bone substitute
to fill the gap. Autologous bone grafting was not per-
formed. Bone healing progressed with time, and bony
union was obtained 6 months after the surgery (Figure 3).

Niikura et al. Journal of Medical Case Reports  (2015) 9:103 

Page 3 of 5

Figure 3 Radiographs obtained after osteosynthesis. (a) Just after the surgery. (b) At 6 months after surgery. (c) At 2 years after surgery.

She regained the ability to walk, although her activity
was limited by her comorbidities, especially interstitial
pneumonia. The latest follow-up was performed 2 years
after the fracture surgery. She had no pain in her right hip
joint or thigh. She could walk with a cane at home and
used a wheelchair outside the home. A radiographic exam-
ination revealed no displacement or loosening of the im-
plants, and the fracture site had remodeled well (Figure 3).

Discussion
There are three case reports describing periprosthetic
femoral fractures which were associated with AFFs [3-5].
In 2009, Sayed-Noor and Sjödén [3] reported a peripros-
thetic femoral fracture around a cemented THA stem of
a 78-year-old woman who had a 9-year history of alen-
dronate use. The patient complained of thigh pain after
a same-level fall, with localized periosteal thickening of
the lateral cortex identified on a radiograph 4 months
later. The fracture level was a little below the stem tip
and within the cement mantle. The fracture was treated
nonoperatively with no weight bearing. However, no
improvement was observed, and the fracture line pro-
gressed to the medial cortex. Open reduction and in-
ternal
fixation was performed with an angle-stable
plating system with cable grip, similar to our operation.
At the latest 5-month follow-up, radiographs showed

bridging callus formation. The authors emphasized the
importance of being aware of the possible correlation
between long-term alendronate therapy and this insuffi-
ciency femoral fracture.

In 2011, Curtin and Fehring [4] reported three cases
of periprosthetic femoral fracture around THA stems
associated with prolonged bisphosphonate use. All three
patients had rheumatoid arthritis and had undergone
chronic medical therapy including glucocorticoids. All of
the patients were women aged 52, 85, and 79 years,
respectively. The bisphosphonates that had been used
over time included alendronate in two patients and rise-
dronate in one patient. A trauma history (a fall) was re-
ported only for one patient. Cement was used for stem
fixation in two patients. The fractures were incomplete,
with localized periosteal thickening of the lateral cortex.
The fracture levels were a little below the stem tip in
one patient with a cementless stem, within the stem in a
patient with a cemented stem, and a little below the
stem tip and within the cement mantle in the third
patient who had a cemented stem. They were treated
conservatively with cessation of bisphosphonate use,
subsequently being given calcium and vitamin D or teri-
paratide. The fractures all healed successfully. The authors
noted the importance of maintaining suspicion for an AFF
being responsible for a painful THA. They suggested that

Niikura et al. Journal of Medical Case Reports  (2015) 9:103 

Page 4 of 5

an AFF around a THA stem might become more common
in the clinical setting, and one must be vigilant and aware
of this etiology of periprosthetic hip pain.

In 2012, Cross et al. [5] reported a periprosthetic fem-
oral fracture around a cemented THA stem in an 81-year-
old woman who had a more than 12-year history of alen-
dronate use. The patient presented with a 5-month history
of activity-related pain in the thigh in the absence of any
traumatic event. The fracture was incomplete with local-
ized periosteal thickening of the lateral cortex. The frac-
ture level was within the stem. The patient was treated
conservatively, with cessation of alendronate use, using
teriparatide and limited weight bearing. The fracture
healed successfully. The authors noted that although the
current definition of an AFF excludes periprosthetic frac-
tures, this case suggested that these fractures do occur
and should be considered in the differential diagnosis of
patients on long-term bisphosphonates who present with
thigh pain despite a well-fixed stem.

We agree with these authors and think that there may
be a periprosthetic femoral fracture with similar path-
ology to that of an AFF. The ASBMR Task Force reports
exclude periprosthetic fractures in the definition of AFF
[1,2]. Hence, we cannot define this kind of fracture as an
AFF. However, we believe the pathology of the current
case includes the pathology of the AFF. The current case
exhibited all the five major features defined by the sec-
ond ASBMR Task Force report [2]. First, the fracture
was not associated with trauma. Second, the fracture
was a complete transverse fracture. Third, the complete
fracture extended through both cortices and was associ-
ated with a medial spike. Fourth, the fracture was non-
comminuted. Fifth, there was apparent localized periosteal
thickening of the lateral cortex at the fracture site. In
addition, the patient had a history of prolonged use of
bisphosphonates and glucocorticoids, which were listed
as minor features of AFFs in the prior ASBMR Task
Force report [1].

Gill et al. [6] reported two cases of lateral insufficiency
periprosthetic femoral
fractures caused by osteopenia
and varus angulation of the stem. There was also subse-
quent increased mechanical loading applied to the lateral
cortex, which was seen to be extremely thin on radio-
graphs. The current case and previously reported cases
did not show malalignment of the stem accompanying
the thickened lateral cortex. Therefore, we believe the
pathology reported by Gill et al. is totally different from
the current case and previously reported cases.

The second ASBMR Task Force report suggested that
AFFs are stress fractures [2]. Because bisphosphonates
localize in areas that are developing stress fractures, sup-
pression of targeted intracortical remodeling by bispho-
sphonates at the site of an AFF is likely to impair the
processes by which stress fractures normally heal [7].

The lateral cortex of the femur is known to sustain high
levels of tensile stress due to bending, which may pre-
cipitate the damage in this location for AFFs [8,9].
There was a well-fixed stem in the current case, and we
suspect that the tensile stress force was more concen-
trated on the lateral cortex at the location of the stem
tip where the fracture occurred than occurs in femoral
bone without a stem. We think that the location where
the tensile stress force is most concentrated on the
lateral cortex is variable depending on the stem design,
stem alignment, or the use of cement. This may be the
reason why the sites of the previously reported and
current periprosthetic femoral fractures with features
reflective of AFFs vary around the stem. Prolonged bis-
phosphonate use decreases bone remodeling [10], causes
microdamage accumulation [11,12], and impairs healing
of stress fractures [13,14]. We suggest that these effects
of prolonged bisphosphonate use affect the incidence of
periprosthetic femoral fractures with features reflective
of AFFs.

The fracture healing process in the current case was
uncomplicated. Adequate callus formation and remodel-
ing were observed. We believe that cessation of alendro-
nate intake 7 months before the fracture was instrumental
in the timely remodeling, with no delay. If the contralat-
eral side has an asymptomatic AFF, teriparatide may be
used for treatment [10,15]. In our case, the contralateral
side had no AFF, and we did not use teriparatide.

Conclusions
Although periprosthetic fractures are excluded by the
current definition of AFFs, there may be a periprosthetic
fracture that has the same or similar pathology as an
AFF. We must be vigilant and aware of this type of peri-
prosthetic fracture, especially for patients who have a
history of prolonged bisphosphonate use.

Consent
Written informed consent was obtained from the patient
for publication of this case report and accompanying
images. A copy of the written consent is available for
review by the Editor-in-Chief of this journal.

Competing interests
The authors declare that they have no competing interests.

Authors’ contributions
TN wrote the manuscript. SYL and YS corrected the patient data. RK and MK
analyzed and interpreted the patient data. All authors read and approved
the final manuscript.

Author details
1Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Kobe University Graduate School of
Medicine, 7-5-1 Kusunoki-cho, Chuo-ku, Kobe 650-0017, Japan. 2Division of
Rehabilitation Medicine, Kobe University Graduate School of Medicine, 7-5-1
Kusunoki-cho, Chuo-ku, Kobe 650-0017, Japan.

Niikura et al. Journal of Medical Case Reports  (2015) 9:103 

Page 5 of 5

Received: 2 February 2015 Revised: 4 February 2015
Accepted: 8 April 2015

References
1.

Shane E, Burr D, Ebeling PR, Abrahamsen B, Adler RA, Brown TD, et al.
Atypical subtrochanteric and diaphyseal femoral fractures: report of a task
force of the American Society for Bone and Mineral Research. J Bone Miner
Res. 2010;25:2267–94.
Shane E, Burr D, Abrahamsen B, Adler RA, Brown TD, Cheung AM, et al.
Atypical subtrochanteric and diaphyseal femoral fractures: Second report of
a task force of the American Society for Bone and Mineral Research. J Bone
Miner Res. 2014;29:1–23.
Sayed-Noor AS, Sjödén GO. Case reports: two femoral insufficiency fractures
after long-term alendronate therapy. Clin Orthop Relat Res. 2009;467:1921–6.
Curtin BM, Fehring TK. Bisphosphonate fractures as a cause of painful total
hip arthroplasty. Orthopedics. 2011;34:e939–44.
Cross MB, Nam D, van der Meulen MC, Bostrom MP. A rare case of a
bisphosphonate-induced peri-prosthetic femoral fracture. J Bone Joint Surg
Br. 2012;94:994–7.
Gill TJ, Sledge JB, Orler R, Ganz R. Lateral insufficiency fractures of the femur
caused by osteopenia and varus angulation: a complication of total hip
arthroplasty. J Arthroplasty. 1999;14:982–7.
Schilcher J, Aspenberg P. Incidence of stress fractures of the femoral shaft in
women treated with bisphosphonate. Acta Orthop. 2009;80:413–5.
Donnelly E, Meredith DS, Nguyen JT, Gladnick BP, Rebolledo BJ, Shaffer AD,
et al. Reduced cortical bone compositional heterogeneity with
bisphosphonate treatment in postmenopausal women with
intertrochanteric and subtrochanteric fractures. J Bone Miner Res.
2012;27:672–8.
Koh JS, Goh SK, Png MA, Ng AC, Howe TS. Distribution of atypical fractures
and cortical stress lesions in the femur: implications on pathophysiology.
Singapore Med J. 2011;52:77–80.

2.

3.

4.

5.

6.

7.

8.

9.

10. Unnanuntana A, Saleh A, Mensah KA, Kleimeyer JP, Lane JM. Atypical

femoral fractures: what do we know about them? AAOS Exhibit Selection.
J Bone Joint Surg Am. 2013;95:e8. 1–13.

11. Allen MR, Burr DB. Three years of alendronate treatment results in similar

levels of vertebral microdamage as after one year of treatment. J Bone
Miner Res. 2007;22:1759–65.

12. Brennan O, Kennedy OD, Lee TC, Rackard SM, O’Brien FJ. Effects of estrogen

13.

deficiency and bisphosphonate therapy on osteocyte viability and
microdamage accumulation in an ovine model of osteoporosis. J Orthop
Res. 2011;29:419–24.
Kidd LJ, Cowling NR, Wu AC, Kelly WL, Forwood MR. Bisphosphonate
treatment delays stress fracture remodeling in the rat ulna. J Orthop Res.
2011;29:1827–33.
Sloan AV, Martin JR, Li S, Li J. Parathyroid hormone and bisphosphonate
have opposite effects on stress fracture repair. Bone. 2010;47:235–40.
15. Chiang CY, Zebaze RM, Ghasem-Zadeh A, Iuliano-Burns S, Hardidge A,
Seeman E. Teriparatide improves bone quality and healing of atypical
femoral fractures associated with bisphosphonate therapy. Bone.
2013;52:360–5.

14.

Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central
and take full advantage of: 

• Convenient online submission

• Thorough peer review

• No space constraints or color ﬁgure charges

• Immediate publication on acceptance

• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar

• Research which is freely available for redistribution

Submit your manuscript at 
www.biomedcentral.com/submit

