Osaku et al. Journal of Medical Case Reports  (2015) 9:88 
DOI 10.1186/s13256-015-0568-x

JOURNAL OF MEDICAL
CASE REPORTS

CA SE R EP O R T
Metastatic nonpalpable invasive lobular breast
carcinoma presenting as rectal stenosis:
a case report
Tadatoshi Osaku, Hideaki Ogata*, Shunsuke Magoshi, Yorichika Kubota, Fumi Saito, Shinsaku Kanazawa
and Hironori Kaneko

Open Access

Abstract

Introduction: Invasive lobular carcinomas have an increased propensity for distant metastases, particularly to the
peritoneum, ovaries, and uterus. In contrast, distant metastases of nonpalpable lobular carcinomas are extremely
rare, and the causes of underlying symptoms of primary carcinomas remain unclear. We report a case of an
asymptomatic invasive lobular carcinoma with a primary mammary lesion in a patient with rectal stenosis.
Case presentation: A 69-year-old Japanese woman presented to our hospital for treatment of constipation. Although
rectal stenosis was confirmed, thorough testing of her lower digestive tract did not identify its cause. Thus, an exploratory
laparotomy and tissue biopsy was performed, and the presence of an invasive lobular carcinoma was confirmed.
Subsequent breast examinations showed that the invasive lobular carcinoma that led to the rectal stenosis was a
metastatic lesion from a primary lesion of the breast duct. As the present breast lobular carcinoma was asymptomatic
and nonpalpable, we did not initially consider metastatic breast cancer as a cause of her symptoms, and the final
diagnosis was delayed.
Conclusions: Peritoneal metastasis from nonpalpable invasive lobular carcinomas is very rare. However, breast
cancer metastasis should be considered when carcinomatous peritonitis is present in a patient with an unknown
primary cancer.
Keywords: Invasive lobular carcinoma, Carcinomatous peritonitis, Breast cancer

Introduction
Compared with invasive ductal carcinomas,
invasive
lobular carcinomas have an increased propensity for dis-
tant metastases, particularly in the peritoneum, ovaries,
and uterus [1-4]. However, although such metastases are
rare for small asymptomatic lesions, the presence of a
distant metastatic invasive lobular carcinoma may reflect
a detectable primary breast lesion, as shown for invasive
carcinomas [4-6]. Therefore, such metastases can be
traced back to their primary lesions with relative ease.
However, if unnoticed, primary carcinomas are not easily
identified as the cause of underlying symptoms.

* Correspondence: ogatah@med.toho-u.ac.jp
Department of Surgery, Division of Breast and Endocrine Surgery (Omori),
Toho University School of Medicine, 6-11-1 Omori-Nishi, Ota-ku, Tokyo
143-8451, Japan

In our case report, asymptomatic, nonpalpable invasive
lobular carcinoma from a primary breast lesion was dis-
covered, following assessments of the symptoms caused
by rectal stenosis. Prior to suspicion of a primary breast
lesion, investigations were primarily focused on our pa-
tient’s lower digestive tract, and a final diagnosis was
made only after an exploratory laparotomy. Herein, we
describe diagnostic strategies and suggest practices that
may avoid diagnostic pitfalls during initial evaluations of
symptoms.

Case presentation
A 69-year-old Japanese woman with unremarkable per-
sonal and family medical histories presented to the general
surgery department of our hospital with constipation for
approximately one month. Her rectal examination re-
vealed rectal stenosis and possible rectal cancer. Her

© 2015 Osaku et al.; licensee BioMed Central. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and
reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly credited. The Creative Commons Public Domain
Dedication waiver (http://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/) applies to the data made available in this article,
unless otherwise stated.

Osaku et al. Journal of Medical Case Reports  (2015) 9:88 

Page 2 of 5

subsequent barium enema examination showed rectosig-
moid stenosis (Figure 1), but no irregularities in her mu-
cosa. Accordingly, a biopsy specimen was taken from her
mucosa by lower abdominal gastrointestinal endoscopy,
and showed no evidence of cancer cells in the area of the
stenosis. Her blood tests revealed slightly elevated levels of
the cancer antigens carbohydrate antigen 15-3 (CA15-3)
and cancer antigen 125 (CA12-5), but all other values
were within normal ranges.

Apart from thickening of her rectosigmoid wall in the
stenotic region (Figure 2), no other abnormalities were
detectable in her abdominal and chest computed tomo-
graphy (CT) scans. Full-length positron emission tomo-
graphy (PET) was suggested as a non-invasive procedure
for detecting the primary lesion, but she declined for
financial reasons. Hence, an exploratory laparotomy was
performed to identify the cause of her rectosigmoid
stenosis.

Her surgical examinations revealed nodules dispersed
throughout her abdominal cavity, and additional stenosis
in her rectum and ileocecum, suggesting peritoneal metas-
tasis. Histopathological findings from a biopsy specimen
of the peritoneal material from around the rectosigmoid
region were consistent with a diagnosis of peritoneal me-
tastasis of an invasive lobular carcinoma, likely from the
breast (Figure 3). However, subsequent breast exami-
nations by the breast oncology department revealed no

Figure 1 A barium enema image showing rectosigmoid stenosis
but no mucosal abnormalities. Arrows show locations of stenosis.

visible or palpable abnormalities or secretions in either of
her breasts.

Subsequent mammogram images showed a spiculated
lactiferous ducts in area C of her right
structure of
breast (Figure 4). Moreover, a ductal ultrasonography re-
vealed a lesion of approximately 5 × 6mm in the same
area (Figure 5). A subsequent biopsy specimen of the
duct showed cells with histopathological characteristics
similar to those in her peritoneal nodules.

Therefore, the final diagnosis was of rectal stenosis
caused by carcinomatous peritonitis arising from a meta-
static invasive lobular breast cancer.

After her diagnosis, courses of hormone therapy and
taxane- and anthracycline-based drugs were administered.
Her rectal stenosis symptoms improved immediately after
completion of two courses of weekly paclitaxel, and she
was able to start ingestion. After discharge, a sequential
regimen of paclitaxel, docetaxel, and anthracycline was
administered in the out-patient department of our insti-
tution for one year, followed by hormone therapy for three
years. However, the disease gradually progressed and she
died four years after the initial diagnosis.

Discussion
Distant metastases occur more frequently from lobular
carcinomas than from more common invasive breast can-
cers. Furthermore, invasive lobular carcinomas metastasize
to the peritoneum and retroperitoneum in 93% of cases
(including autopsies), the ovaries in 36% of cases, and the
uterus in 43% of cases [1], and can metastasize to other
areas and organs of the digestive tract [2-4]. However, such
distant metastases are rare in the absence of palpable pri-
mary lesions.

Although it is well known that invasive lobular carci-
noma tends to metastasize to the peritoneum, patients
with initial symptoms that are exclusively abdominal
are rare. We performed PubMed searches using the
search terms ‘invasive lobular carcinoma’, ‘peritoneum’,
‘metastatic’, ‘unknown origin’, and ‘occult breast cancer’.
The resulting studies showed only a few cases in which
initial symptoms in the retroperitoneum and digestive
tract were caused by metastasis of palpable invasive lobu-
lar carcinomas [5,6], and some recurrent cases had re-
ported involvement of symptoms in digestive organs more
than 10 years postoperatively [7,8]. However, only two
case studies reported the appearance of initial symptoms
in the digestive tract due to metastasis of nonpalpable in-
vasive lobular carcinomas [9,10]. One of these cancers
metastasized to the stomach and the other metastasized
to the colon, and both cases were diagnosed preopera-
tively, following identification of adenocarcinoma in endo-
scopic specimens from mucosal lesions with invasions of
lobular carcinoma.

Osaku et al. Journal of Medical Case Reports  (2015) 9:88 

Page 3 of 5

Figure 2 An abdominal computed tomography image showing rectal stenosis with thickening of the rectosigmoid wall.

solid nest or occasionally a signet-ring shape, but rarely
a glandular structure. Intercellular mucus is also fre-
quently present. Estrogen receptor (ER) and proges-
terone receptor (PgR) expression are more frequent in
lobular carcinomas than in other invasive carcinomas

In our case report, a biopsy specimen of our patient’s
associated mucosa showed no evidence of cancer cells in
the area of her stenosis. This negative result reflected
the presence of a specific metastatic form of invasive
lobular carcinoma known as a peritoneal metastasis,
which reportedly invades perirectal areas and causes rec-
tal stenosis, but does not reach the mucosal layer. More-
over, pathological analyses of perirectal tissue specimens
from her laparotomy showed invasive lobular carcinoma,
as indicated by lobular carcinoma histology showing a
non-polarized, even distribution of small cancer cells
that had diffusely invaded her interstitial tissue. These
cells typically appear in a single row, which is often re-
ferred to as an Indian file [11,12], and usually form a

Figure 3 Histopathological findings of a peritoneal sample. The
Indian file pattern of small cells (hematoxylin and eosin, ×400
magnification) suggests peritoneal metastasis from an invasive
lobular carcinoma of the breast.

Figure 4 Mammogram showing abnormal tissue in the right breast
(category four). Arrows indicate abnormal tissue.

Osaku et al. Journal of Medical Case Reports  (2015) 9:88 

Page 4 of 5

Figure 5 A ductal ultrasonogram showing an irregularly shaped mass of approximately 5 × 6mm with unclear boundaries in area C of our
patient’s right breast. The internal echogenicity was uneven and the posterior echo was dissipated.

invasive lobular carcinomas,

[13], although human epidermal growth factor receptor
2 (HER2) overexpression is rare [11]. Furthermore,
E-cadherin gene mutations are present in more than
85% of
likely reflecting
characteristically low protein expression of E-cadherin
[14,15]. Our patient’s pathological examination revealed
characteristics of an invasive lobular carcinoma, inclu-
ding a row of small cells (Indian file), negative staining
for E-cadherin and HER2, and positive staining for both
ER and PgR. However, the clinicopathological mecha-
nisms that induced this metastasis from a non-palpable
cancer are unclear.

In our case report, extensive initial assessments failed
to reveal the cause of our patient’s intestinal stenosis,
and a conclusive diagnosis was only made after a biopsy
during an exploratory laparotomy. PET/CT imaging has
proven utility as an imaging modality for visceral metas-
tases, and it might have been effective in this case. How-
ever, despite its high accuracy in breast cancer staging,
PET/CT was not deemed cost-effective for this initial
evaluation of breast cancer [16], according to the ab-
sence of financial support for the procedure from the
national health care system in Japan.

In retrospect, a tentative diagnosis could have been
made according to the guidelines for unknown primary
neoplasms. Specifically, the 2012 National Comprehensive
Cancer Network (NCCN) Guidelines for Diagnosis of
Unknown Primary Cancers recommend a comprehen-
sive review of medical histories for patients in whom
such cancers are suspected,
including careful exami-
nation of mammary, urinary, and reproductive tissues.
Following identification of the potential location of the

primary lesion by biopsy, further testing using mam-
mography should be performed to confirm tentative
findings [17].

As the present breast tumor was non-palpable, visual or
palpable confirmation of abnormalities in our patient’s
breast tissue was not immediately possible. However, a
mammography or ultrasonography upon admission may
have limited the physical trauma of the laparotomy, and
would have warranted treatment earlier. Thus, primary
breast lesions should be considered as possible under-
lying sources of invasive lobular carcinomas in cases of
unknown primary cancer. Subsequently, noninvasive
tests for breast cancers are warranted as a part of rou-
tine clinical assessments to determine the presence of
such lesions.

Conclusions
We report a case of nonpalpable invasive lobular carci-
noma presenting with symptoms that were suggestive of
carcinomatous peritonitis. Although peritoneal metasta-
sis from a nonpalpable breast lesion is rare, breast can-
cer metastasis should be considered as a potential cause
of carcinomatous peritonitis in patients with unknown
primary cancers.

Consent
Written informed consent was obtained from the pa-
tient’s next of kin for publication of this case report
and all accompanying images. A copy of the written
consent is available for review by the Editor-in-Chief
of this journal.

Osaku et al. Journal of Medical Case Reports  (2015) 9:88 

Page 5 of 5

14. Pai K, Baliga P, Shrestha BL. E-cadherin expression: a diagnostic utility for
differentiating breast carcinomas with ductal and lobular morphologies.
J Clin Diagn Res. 2013;7:840–4. Epub 2013 Mar 18. doi:10.7860/JCDR/2013/
5755.2954.
Fernandes GS, Corrêa TS, Carvalho EP, Katz A, Hoff PM. Gastric and
endobronchial metastases in a case of lobular breast cancer. Case Rep
Oncol. 2013;6:555–60.

15.

16. Gallamini A, Zwarthoed C, Borra A. Positron Emission Tomography (PET) in
oncology. Cancers (Basel). 2014;6(4):1821–89. doi:10.3390/cancers6041821.

17. National Comprehensive Cancer Network Oncological Clinical Diagnosis and

Treatment Guidelines. Occult Primary (Cancer of Unknown Primary [CUP]).
1st ed. 2012. http://www.tri-kobe.org/nccn/guideline/archive/occult2012/
japanese/occult.html

Abbreviations
CA12-5: Cancer antigen 125; CA15-3: Carbohydrate antigen 15-3; CT: Computed
tomography; PET: Positron emission tomography; ER: Estrogen receptor;
PgR: Progesterone receptor; HER2: Human epidermal growth factor receptor 2;
NCCN: National Comprehensive Cancer Network.

Competing interests
The authors declare that they have no competing interests.

Authors’ contributions
TO analyzed the data and drafted the manuscript. HO analyzed and
interpreted the patient data, drafted the manuscript, supervised TO, and
revised the manuscript. SM made the figures. YK, FS, and SK provided
valuable insights during manuscript preparation. HK supervised the entire
case. All authors read and approved the final manuscript.

Acknowledgments
We wish to thank Dr Tetsuya Maeda in the Department of Surgery, Toho
University School of Medicine, Japan, for advice on the diagnosis of peritoneal
metastasis of invasive lobular carcinoma. No funding was received by any of
the authors.

Received: 7 October 2014 Accepted: 5 March 2015

References
1.

Harris M, Howell A, Chrissohou M, Swindell RI, Hudson M, Sellwood RA.
A comparison of the metastatic pattern of infiltrating lobular carcinoma
and infiltrating duct carcinoma of the breast. Br J Cancer. 1984;50:23–30.

5.

6.

4.

3.

2. McLemore EC, Pockaj BA, Reynolds C, Gray RJ, Hernandez JL, Grant CS, et al.
Breast cancer: presentation and intervention in women with gastrointestinal
metastasis and carcinomatosis. Ann Surg Oncol. 2005;12:886–94.
doi:10.1245/ASO.2005.03.030.
Sobinsky JD, Willson TD, Podbielski FJ, Connolly MM. Unusual metastatic
patterns of invasive lobular carcinoma of the breast. Case Rep Oncol Med.
2013;2013:986517. Epub 2013 Nov 10. doi:10.1155/2013/986517.
Saranovic D, Kovac JD, Knezevic S, Susnjar S, Stefanovic AD, Saranovic DS,
et al. Invasive lobular breast cancer presenting an unusual metastatic
pattern in the form of peritoneal and rectal metastases: a case report.
J Breast Cancer. 2011;14:247–50. doi:10.4048/jbc.2011.14.3.247.
Arrangoiz R, Papavasiliou P, Dushkin H, Farma JM. Case report and literature
review: Metastatic lobular carcinoma of the breast an unusual presentation. Int J
Surg Case Rep. 2011;2:301–5. Epub 2011 Oct 12. doi:10.1016/j.ijscr.2011.06.010.
Yousef GM, Gabril MY, Al-Haddad S, Mulligan AM, Honey RJ. Invasive lobular
carcinoma of the breast presenting as retroperitoneal fibrosis: a case report.
J Med Case Rep. 2010;4:175. doi:10.1186/1752-1947-4-175.
Franceschini G, Manno A, Mulè A, Verbo A, Rizzo G, Sermoneta D, et al. Gastro-
intestinal symptoms as clinical manifestation of peritoneal and retroperitoneal
spread of an invasive lobular breast cancer: report of a case and review of the
literature. BMC Cancer. 2006;6:193. doi:10.1186/1471-2407-6-193.
Nikkar-Esfahani A, Kumar BG, Aitken D, Wilson RG. Metastatic breast carcinoma
presenting as a sigmoid stricture: report of a case and review of the literature.
Case Rep Gastroenterol. 2013;7:106–11. doi:10.1159/000348760.
Ciulla A, Castronovo G, Tomasello G, Maiorana AM, Russo L, Daniele E, et al.
Gastric metastases originating from occult breast lobular carcinoma:
diagnostic and therapeutic problems. World J Surg Oncol. 2008;6:78.
doi:10.1186/1477-7819-6-78.

10. Razzetta F, Tassara E, Saro F, Sironi M, D’Ambrosio G. Rare abdominal

7.

8.

9.

metastases from occult lobular breast cancer: report of two cases. Updates
Surg. 2011;63(2):129–33. doi:10.1007/s13304-011-0047-x.

11. Arpino G, Bardou VJ, Clark GM, Elledge RM. Infiltrating lobular carcinoma of

the breast: tumor characteristics and clinical outcome. Breast Cancer Res.
2004;6:R149–56. doi:10.1186/bcr767.

12. Gamallo C, Palacios J, Suarez A, Pizarro A, Navarro P, Quintanilla M, et al.

13.

Correlation of E-cadherin expression with differentiation grade and
histological type in breast carcinoma. Am J Pathol. 1993;142:987–93.
Korhonen T, Huhtala H, Holli K. A comparison of the biological and clinical
features of invasive lobular and ductal carcinomas of the breast. Breast
Cancer Res Treat. 2004;85:23–9.

Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central
and take full advantage of: 

• Convenient online submission

• Thorough peer review

• No space constraints or color ﬁgure charges

• Immediate publication on acceptance

• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar

• Research which is freely available for redistribution

Submit your manuscript at 
www.biomedcentral.com/submit

