Cadeddu et al. Journal of Medical Case Reports  (2015) 9:77 
DOI 10.1186/s13256-015-0547-2

JOURNAL OF MEDICAL
CASE REPORTS

CA SE R EP O R T
Clozapine toxicity due to a multiple drug
interaction: a case report
Giovanna Cadeddu1, Arianna Deidda2, Maria Erminia Stochino2, Nicola Velluti3, Caterina Burrai4
and Maria Del Zompo1,2*

Open Access

Abstract

Introduction: We report the case of a multiple drug interaction involving clozapine, antifungals and oral
contraceptives, which resulted in an increased clozapine plasma level, pericarditis with pericardial effusion and
eosinophilia in a young Caucasian woman. These symptoms and signs disappeared a few days after discontinuation
of clozapine. At present, we are not aware of reports of clozapine–antifungals interaction, whereas there is only one
other case report on the interaction between oral contraceptives and clozapine. The purpose of this case report is
to show the risk of potentially serious adverse effects stemming from drug interactions involving medications
routinely used in clinical practice.
Case presentation: A 29-year-old Caucasian woman diagnosed with a schizoaffective disorder was admitted to a
psychiatric unit for acute psychosis (hallucinations, delusions and catatonic behavior). She denied smoking tobacco
products and was on long-term oral contraceptives. During the first month of hospitalization she was treated with
antipsychotics and for 1 week she took simultaneously fluconazole and miconazole gel, after being diagnosed
with oral candidiasis. On the last day of antifungals treatment, 29 days after admission, clozapine was started with
resolution of psychotic symptoms. After 3 weeks, her clozapine plasma level had increased to 542ng/mL and
eosinophilia was observed. She complained of nausea, vomiting and palpitations; echocardiography showed
echocardiographic abnormalities and pericardial effusion. Oral contraceptives were discontinued and after 1 week
clozapine was interrupted, with a complete resolution of side effects and pericardial effusion within 4 days.
Conclusions: Clozapine is metabolized by cytochrome P450. The use of inhibitors or other substrates of cytochrome
P450, such as antifungals and oral contraceptives, can cause long-lasting interactions and clozapine toxicity. The
Naranjo algorithm shows clozapine is a definite cause of pericarditis (score 9) and both clozapine–antifungals
and clozapine–contraceptives interactions resulted probable (score 5) in Drug Interaction Probability Scale. A good
knowledge on drugs that act as substrates, inhibitors or inducers of cytochrome P450 is mandatory. When those
drugs are used in patients taking clozapine, blood level monitoring of clozapine should be recommended, since a
lower dose of clozapine might be required to prevent clozapine toxicity.
Keywords: Clozapine, Drugs interaction, Pericarditis

* Correspondence: delzompo@unica.it
1Section of Neuroscience and Clinical Pharmacology, Department of
Biomedical Sciences, University of Cagliari, SP8, Km. 0,700, 09042 Monserrato,
CA, Italy
2Sardinian Regional Center of Pharmacovigilance, Unit of Clinical
Pharmacology, AOUCA, “San Giovanni di Dio Hospital”, Via Ospedale 54,
09124 Cagliari, Italy
Full list of author information is available at the end of the article

© 2015 Cadeddu et al.; licensee BioMed Central. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and
reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly credited. The Creative Commons Public Domain
Dedication waiver (http://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/) applies to the data made available in this article,
unless otherwise stated.

Cadeddu et al. Journal of Medical Case Reports  (2015) 9:77 

Page 2 of 6

Introduction
Clozapine is an atypical antipsychotic, known for life-
threatening side effects, such as agranulocytosis and car-
diac complications, but also for its role in the treatment of
resistant psychoses when other therapies have failed [1].

The most serious cardiac complications caused by clo-
zapine, such as cardiomyopathy, myocarditis and peri-
carditis, are characterized by shortness of breath, heart
palpitations/pains and thoracic pain. In most cases, elec-
trocardiographic changes, pericardial effusion, and non-
specific signs of inflammation are observed. However,
only a few cases of pericarditis and pericardial effusion
induced by clozapine, even when used at low dosage, are
reported in the literature [2].

A review by Wehmeier et al. reported 65 cases of
myocarditis, 52 cases of cardiomyopathy and only six
cases of pericarditis occurring during clozapine treat-
ment [3]. The dose used is a poor predictor of clinical
response, and there is little correlation between dose
and plasma level, due to individual differences in metab-
olism, pharmacokinetic differences, gender, age, drug in-
teractions and the smoking of tobacco products.

Antifungal drugs, including fluconazole and micona-
zole, are widely used in the treatment of systemic candi-
dal infections and mycoses. Multiple drug therapy is a
common therapeutic practice and many drug–drug in-
teractions involving metabolic inhibition are reported in
the literature. Clozapine is metabolized by the hepatic
cytochrome P450 (CYP) microsomal system. The contri-
bution of these isoenzymes to clozapine metabolism dif-
fers between individuals, leading to the wide inter-patient
variability found in clozapine plasma concentration. The
drug is converted to norclozapine by CYP3A4 and 1A2
and to clozapine N-oxide by CYP3A4 [4,5]. However,
CYP2C19 is also important at clozapine therapeutic con-
centration (24%) whereas the contributions of CYP2C9
(12%) and 2D6 (6%) are more modest. CYP1A2 is the
most important form at therapeutic concentration (30%),
while CYP3A4 plays a more important role at a high
concentration (37%) than at therapeutic concentration
(22%) [6].

The use of inhibitors or other substrates of P450, such
as oral contraceptive (OCs) and antifungals, can cause
unfavorable and long-lasting interactions and clozapine
in vitro, miconazole and ketoconazole may
toxicity:
cause an inhibition of more than 50% of clozapine me-
tabolism [7].

It has been reported that fluconazole and miconazole

competitively inhibit CYP3A4 activities.

In particular, CYP3A4, CYP2C9, CYP2C19 and CYP1A2
are more strongly inhibited by miconazole than flucona-
zole [8], and this inhibition may last several days, due to
antifungals long half-life and wash-out, allowing clozapine
accumulation and toxicity. In this way, miconazole and

fluconazole may inhibit clozapine metabolism determining
an increase and/or prolongation of both therapeutic and
adverse effects. At present, we are not aware of reports of
clozapine–antifungals interaction; however, drug–drug in-
teractions involving other classes of antipsychotics and an-
tifungals are reported in the literature [9], whereas there is
only one other case report on the interaction between
OCs and clozapine [10]. The purpose of this case report
is to show the risk of potentially serious adverse effects
stemming from drug interactions involving medications
routinely used in clinical practice. Learning how to predict
and monitor drug–drug interactions may help reduce the
incidence of clinically significant adverse drug events.

Case presentation
A 29-year-old Caucasian woman affected by a schizoaf-
fective disorder, treated with haloperidol 2mg per day
and olanzapine 10mg per day, was admitted at a Psychi-
atric Unit for a reacutization of her psychotic symptoms
(hallucinations, delusions and catatonic behavior), due to
a lack of medications adherence. Her past medical history
was characterized by a previous hospitalization for acute
psychosis 1 year earlier, incomplete right bundle branch
block (RBBB) and ovarian cysts. Her family medical his-
tory revealed that her mother had an anxiety disorder and
her grandmother had a major depression. She was on
long-term OCs, ethinyl estradiol/drospirenone 0.03mg/
3mg per day and denied smoking tobacco products and
any substance use.

A physical examination showed a temperature of 37.2°C
and blood pressure of 150/100mmHg, whereas all the
other parameters were within normal range. The results of
blood tests and electrocardiography (ECG) were normal,
except for RBBB. Her hospitalization lasted 3 months and
during the first month she was treated orally with olanza-
pine 20mg per day and haloperidol 9mg per day for 23
days. On the 23rd day of hospitalization, since a poor
response to treatment was observed, antipsychotics were
interrupted and aripiprazole 30mg per day was adminis-
tered for 6 days. In addition, on the same day, she was di-
agnosed with oral candidiasis and treated simultaneously
for a week orally with fluconazole 100mg per day and mi-
conazole oral gel 2% 20mg, two times per day. Since her
psychotic symptoms did not seem to improve, 29 days
after admission and on the last day of antifungal treat-
ment, aripiprazole was replaced by clozapine.

Clozapine was started at 25mg per day orally and was
gradually increased, within 16 days, to 225mg per day with
the resolution of psychotic symptoms. After 3 weeks the
plasma level of clozapine was 542ng/mL (range 350 to
450ng/mL) and the level of its active metabolite norcloza-
pine was 216ng/mL. Blood tests showed eosinophilia and
an increase of C-reactive protein (5.73mg/L). She experi-
enced the first symptoms (nausea, vomiting, palpitations)

Cadeddu et al. Journal of Medical Case Reports  (2015) 9:77 

Page 3 of 6

5 days before the plasma level of clozapine was measured,
while she was being treated with clozapine and OCs. At
that point,
long-term OCs treatment was discontinued
and no other form of contraception was administered to
her. She was referred to a cardiologist.

A physical examination showed tachycardia and gallop
rhythm and she complained of nausea and vomiting. An
ECG revealed sinus tachycardia (135 beats/minute), QTc
0.43 seconds, and S-T segment depression and inversion
of T-waves in inferior and lateral leads. An echocardiog-
raphy showed a small pericardial effusion suggestive of
iatrogenic pericarditis.

Due to those findings, 1 week after discontinuing OCs,
clozapine was also interrupted and she was not rechal-
lenged. Within 4 days, she showed resolution of clozapine
side effects, normalization of ECG and complete recovery
of pericardial effusion. Her symptoms continued to im-
prove and 6 days after discontinuing clozapine she was dis-
charged. The plasma level of clozapine, measured 1 week
after discontinuing clozapine (2 weeks after interruption of

OCs) was undetectable. At 1 month follow-up, transtho-
racic echocardiography and inflammatory markers were
normal (Figure 1).

Discussion
We report the case of a multiple drug interaction involv-
ing clozapine, OCs and antifungals, which resulted in an
increased clozapine plasma level, pericarditis and eosino-
philia. Although clozapine toxicity is usually linked with
clozapine serum levels higher than 1000ng/mL, at the
moment there is no evidence of a clear toxicity range in
the literature [11] and we cannot exclude that the patient
might have experienced an adverse reaction at a lower
serum level of clozapine (542ng/mL). Pericarditis is an in-
sidious disease which may debut with nonspecific symp-
toms, therefore a high level of diagnostic suspicion is
always needed when clozapine is being used. In this case,
the most common causes of pericardial illness were ruled
out with the possible exception of a viral pericarditis,
since cardiac symptoms began 1 month after clozapine

Figure 1 Clinical case timeline. The figure reports the most important clinical aspects, interventions, diagnosis and follow up with the
outcomes. Abbreviations: ECG, electrocardiography; min, minutes; OCs, oral contraceptives.

Cadeddu et al. Journal of Medical Case Reports  (2015) 9:77 

Page 4 of 6

Table 1 Drugs’ metabolism
Medication
Clozapine

Metabolism
CYP1A2, 3A4, 2C19,
2C9, 2D6

Inducers Inhibitors
–

–

Fluconazole

Hepatic

Miconazole

Hepatic

Ethinyl
estradiol

CYP3A4, 1A2

Drospirenone CYP3A4

–

–

–

–

CYP3A4, 2C9

CYP3A4, 2C9, 2C19, 1A2

CYP1A2, 2B6, 2C19, 3A4

CYP1A1, 2C9, 2C19

was started, quickly resolved after discontinuation and
did not return again. Clozapine-induced myocarditis was
also excluded since echocardiography, cardiac necrosis
markers and brain natriuretic peptide were all negative.

Clozapine was a definite causative agent (score of 9)
according to the Naranjo probability scale [12], which
evaluates single-drug adverse events, and according to
the Drug Interaction Probability Scale (DIPS) [13], a
probable causative agent, since both clozapine–antifun-
gals and clozapine–OCs interactions scored 5.

The ranking differences between these two assessment
tools involve the questions used in DIPS to evaluate
drug–drug interactions;
in multiple drug interactions
DIPS is the most accurate tool. A positive rechallenge with
the precipitant drug is a strong indicator of causation.

Unfortunately, the patient was not rechallenged with clo-
zapine, and previous plasma levels of the drug were not
measured, so we are not able to rule out the presence of
clozapine toxicity prior to the first measurement.

At present, we are not aware of reports of clozapine–
antifungals interaction, but drug–drug interactions in-
volving other classes of antipsychotics and antifungals
are reported in the literature [9]. 17α-Ethinyl estradiol
(EE) is a CYP3A4 substrate and an inhibitor of CYP1A1
in vitro; moreover, there is evidence of a time-dependent
inhibition of CYP3A4 and CYP3A5 by OCs [14]. Drospir-
enone is partially metabolized by CYP3A4 and is also an
inhibitor of CYP2C19 and CY2C9. Therefore, both OCs’
components can inhibit different CYPs, although at higher
clozapine concentrations CYP3A4 is the most active; thus
the greater inhibition is more probably determined by EE.
There is less information about the effect of OCs on
other drugs, but clinically relevant pharmacokinetic
interactions are known to occur. A possible OCs–cloza-
pine interaction mechanism could be a competitive en-
zyme inhibition, as both drugs are partially metabolized
by CYP3A4, and OCs are considered mild inhibitors of
CYP3A4. Moreover, several studies have shown that
OCs impair the metabolism of CYP1A2 substrates in vivo
[15], which might represent another possible mechanism
(Table 1).

Figure 2 Drugs’ interaction timeline and pharmacokinetics. The figure reports the four drugs administered to the patient at the same time
(ethinyl estradiol/drospirenone, clozapine, fluconazole, miconazole) and the onset and duration of the adverse drug reactions. The peak of
clozapine plasma level (542ng/mL) was observed after 18 days. Adverse drug reactions were observed 2 days after clozapine peak and lasted
14 days. Abbreviation: ADRs, adverse drug reactions.

Cadeddu et al. Journal of Medical Case Reports  (2015) 9:77 

Page 5 of 6

To the best of our knowledge, there is only one report
of a possible drug interaction between clozapine (at a
dose of 550mg per day) and OCs,
in a 47-year-old
woman who was a heavy smoker of tobacco products,
resulting in elevated clozapine plasma levels (736, 770,
and 792ng/mL) and onset of adverse effects, after which
OCs treatment was discontinued. Side effects disap-
peared within a few days and normalization of clozapine
blood levels was observed over the next 6 weeks [10].

Finally, the inhibition of CYPs is compatible with the
pharmacokinetics of antifungals and OCs, allowing the
elevation of clozapine plasma levels which occurred 2
weeks after antifungals interruption. Miconazole and flu-
conazole half-life and wash-out are 24 hours and 10 days,
and 28 hours and 12 days, respectively. In this case, we
must take into account not only the single antifungals–
clozapine interaction but also the contribution of OCs
(half-life 20 hours, wash-out 8 days) which might have im-
paired CYPs metabolism for 26 days, while the patient
was simultaneously treated with clozapine (Figure 2).
Since OCs were administered for a longer time, compared
to antifungals, we think that they might have contributed
more significantly to the increase of the blood concentra-
tion of clozapine.

Conclusions
To conclude, this report suggests a possible multiple drug
interaction between clozapine, antifungals and OCs, which
resulted in an elevated clozapine blood level, eosinophilia
and pericarditis with pericardial effusion.

Based on the case report described here, we can make

the following recommendations:

1. In patients taking clozapine, detecting ECG and

echocardiography abnormalities is highly
recommended, and clozapine must be stopped if
patients develop pericardial involvement.

2. Blood level monitoring of clozapine is essential when

inhibitors or substrates of CYP3A4 and CYP1A2,
such as antifungals or OCs, are being used, since a
lower dose of clozapine might be required to
prevent adverse effects.

3. A good knowledge of drugs that act as substrates,

inhibitors or inducers of P450 is essential for doctors
to take appropriate cautions, and a close monitoring
for potential drug interactions when using drugs
with a narrow therapeutic range such as clozapine
is always recommendable.

Consent
Written informed consent was obtained from the patient
for publication of this case report and accompanying im-
ages. A copy of the written consent is available for re-
view by the Editor-in-Chief of this journal.

Abbreviations
CYP: Cytochrome P450; DIPS: Drug Interaction Probability Scale;
ECG: Electrocardiography; EE: 17α-Ethinyl estradiol; OCs: Oral contraceptives;
RBBB: Right bundle branch block.

Competing interests
The authors declare that they have no competing interests.

Authors’ contributions
GC analyzed and interpreted the patient data, and drafted the manuscript.
AD and MES participated in data collection and data interpretation and
performed the literature search. NV is the specialist who was following the
patient. CB signaled the case. MDZ supervised and contributed in writing the
manuscript. All authors read and approved the final manuscript.

Acknowledgements
This work was partly supported by the Sardinian Regional Councillorship of
Health with a grant dedicated to “The development of a Pharmacovigilance
Network in Sardinia”, 2011. The authors wish to acknowledge Ms Enrica
Mosca for drafting and editing the manuscript.

Author details
1Section of Neuroscience and Clinical Pharmacology, Department of
Biomedical Sciences, University of Cagliari, SP8, Km. 0,700, 09042 Monserrato,
CA, Italy. 2Sardinian Regional Center of Pharmacovigilance, Unit of Clinical
Pharmacology, AOUCA, “San Giovanni di Dio Hospital”, Via Ospedale 54,
09124 Cagliari, Italy. 3Center of Mental Health, ASL8, Via Raffaello 5, 09032
Assemini, CA, Italy. 4Psychiatric Unit, ASL 8, “SS. Trinità” Hospital, Via Is
Mirrionis 92, 09121 Cagliari, Italy.

Received: 31 July 2014 Accepted: 18 February 2015

References
1.

2.

Baldessarini RJ, Frankenburg FR. Clozapine. A novel antipsychotic agent.
N Engl J Med. 1991;324:746–54.
Rathore S, Masani ND, Callaghan PO. Clozapine-induced effuso-constrictive
pericarditis. Case report and review of the literature. Cardiology.
2007;108:183–5.

3. Wehmeier PM, Heiser P, Remschmidt H. Myocarditis, pericarditis and

4.

5.

6.

7.

8.

cardiomyopathy in patients treated with clozapine. J Clin Pharm Ther.
2005;30:91–6.
Buur-Rasmussen B, Brosen K. Cytochrome P450 and therapeutic drug
monitoring with respect to clozapine. Eur Neuropsychopharmacol.
1999;9:453–9.
Eiermann B, Engel G, Johansson I, Zanger UM, Bertilsson L. The involvement
of CYP1A2 and CYP3A4 in the metabolism of clozapine. Br J Clin Pharmacol.
1997;44:439–46.
Olesen OV, Linnet K. Contribution of five human cytochrome P450 isoforms
to the N-demethylation of clozapine in vitro at low and high concentration.
J Clin Pharmacol. 2001;41:823–32.
Bun H, Disdier B, Aubert C, Catalin J. Interspecies variability and drug
interactions of clozapine metabolism by microsomes. Fundam Clin
Pharmacol. 1999;13:577–8.
Niwa T, Shiraga T, Takagi A. Effect of antifungal drugs on cytochrome P450
(CYP) 2C9, CYP2C19, and CYP3A4 activities in human liver microsomes. Biol
Pharm Bull. 2005;28:1805–8.

9. Mahatthanatrakul W, Sriwiriyajan S, Ridtitid W, Boonleang J, Wongnawa M,

Rujimamahasan N, et al. Effect of cytochrome P450 3A4 inhibitor
ketoconazole on risperidone pharmacokinetics in healthy volunteers. J Clin
Pharm Ther. 2012;37:221–5.

10. Gabbay V, O’Dowd MA, Mamamtavrishvili M, Asnis GM. Clozapine and oral

contraceptives: a possible drug interaction. J Clin Psychopharmacol.
2002;22:621–2.

11. Greenwood-Smith C, Lubman DI, Castle DJ. Serum clozapine levels: a review

of their clinical utility. J Psychopharmacol. 2003;17:234–8.

12. Naranjo CA, Busto U, Sellers EM, Sandor P, Ruiz I, Roberts EA, et al. A
method for estimating the probability of adverse drug reactions. Clin
Pharmacol Ther. 1981;30:239–45.

13. Horn JR, Hansten PD, Chan LN. Proposal for a new tool to evaluate drug

interaction cases. Ann Pharmacother. 2007;41:674–80.

Cadeddu et al. Journal of Medical Case Reports  (2015) 9:77 

Page 6 of 6

14. Chang SY, Chen C, Yang Z, Rodrigues AD. Further assessment of

15.

17alpha-ethinyl estradiol as an inhibitor of different human cytochrome
P450 forms in vitro. Drug Metab Dispos. 2009;37:1667–75.
Karjalainen MJ, Neuvonen PJ, Backman JT. In vitro inhibition of CYP1A2 by
model inhibitors, anti-inflammatory analgesics and female sex steroids:
predictability of in vivo interactions. Basic Clin Pharmacol Toxicol.
2008;103:157–65.

Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central
and take full advantage of: 

• Convenient online submission

• Thorough peer review

• No space constraints or color ﬁgure charges

• Immediate publication on acceptance

• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar

• Research which is freely available for redistribution

Submit your manuscript at 
www.biomedcentral.com/submit

