Pezzoli et al. Journal of Medical Case Reports 2015, 9:15
http://www.jmedicalcasereports.com/content/9/1/15

JOURNAL OF MEDICAL
CASE REPORTS

CA SE R EP O R T
Gallstone ileus treated with non-surgical
conservative methods: a case report
Alessandro Pezzoli1*, Antonella Maimone1, Nadia Fusetti1 and Elena Pizzo2

Open Access

Abstract

Introduction: The preoperative diagnosis of gallstone ileus is challenging due to the variability of its presentation,
often resulting in late diagnosis. Controversy remains regarding the management of gallstone ileus; surgery is the
standard treatment, but also less invasive approaches have proven to be successful. We present an unusual case of
gallstone ileus and its conservative treatment.
Case presentation: We describe the case of a 49-year-old Caucasian woman with a bowel sub-occlusion, treated
conservatively. The imaging technique (plain abdominal X-ray and computed tomography scan) led to a diagnosis
of gallstones ileus. A surgical intervention was not performed. Instead, she underwent extracorporeal shock-wave
lithotripsy to fragment the stones, mechanical intestinal dilatation for ileocolic stenosis and endoscopic removal of
the gallstone. The presence of an apricot shell contributed to the bowel occlusion and was removed. The intervention
was successful and without complications.
Conclusions: Given the variability of the gallstone ileus presentation, surgery could not be the only treatment for our
patient. In our case report, we show that colonoscopy could be a non-invasive approach that allows for diagnosis and
treatment at the same time. The available data do not show a higher rate of recurrent biliary disease in cases where this
method has been used, therefore in select patients, a conservative treatment could be an effective solution.
Keywords: Gallstone ileus, Endoscopy, Extracorporeal shock-wave lithotripsy

Introduction
Gallstone ileus is a rare mechanical bowel obstruction
caused by the transition of a gallstone in the gastrointes-
tinal tract through a biliary-enteric fistula, or following
endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography (ERCP),
which occurs in 1 to 3% of all cases of mechanical ileus
[1]. Our patient's history of gallbladder disease and the de-
velopment of imaging techniques played a key role in the
preoperative diagnosis. The traditional treatment of gall-
stone ileus is surgery [2], however the surgical mortality
rate is high and a less invasive approach, such as endo-
scopic therapies, could be considered. The success of these
techniques greatly depends on the size of the gallstone
and the location of the intestinal obstruction. We describe
a case of gallstone ileus and how a combination of endo-
scopic and extracorporeal shock-wave lithotripsy (ESWL)
treatment can be an effective solution.

* Correspondence: a.pezzoli@ospfe.it
1Department of Gastroenterology and Endoscopy Unit, Sant’Anna University
Hospital, v. A. Moro 8 203, 44124, Cona, Ferrara, Italy
Full list of author information is available at the end of the article

Case presentation
A 49-year-old Caucasian women presented to our de-
partment with a one-day history of nausea, vomiting and
abdominal pain. Approximately two months previously,
she had presented with symptoms of biliary colic, which
was subsequently regressed with non-steroidal anti-
inflammatory drugs. Her medical history included cae-
cum and terminal ileum resection for bowel ischemia
with ileocolic anastomosis. On examination she did not
present with any signs of intestinal obstruction or periton-
itis and her rectal examination was normal. The laboratory
findings, including her white blood count, C-reactive pro-
tein (CRP), aspartate aminotransferase (AST), alanine ami-
notransferase (ALT), Υ-glutamyl transpeptidase (GGT),
alkaline phosphatase (AP) and bilirubin levels, were within
the normal range.

Her abdominal radiographs showed dilated loops and
air-fluid levels, mainly in the terminal ileum, however
the rectal ampulla was inhabited by stool and air. Calci-
fied masses were identified in the right upper quadrant
(Figure 1).

© 2015 Pezzoli et al.; licensee BioMed Central. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and
reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly credited. The Creative Commons Public Domain
Dedication waiver (http://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/) applies to the data made available in this article,
unless otherwise stated.

Pezzoli et al. Journal of Medical Case Reports 2015, 9:15
http://www.jmedicalcasereports.com/content/9/1/15

Page 2 of 5

Figure 1 Plain abdominal X-ray showing an obstruction and
dilated intestinal loops. Arrow indicates gallstone or possibly the
apricot shell.

A computed tomography (CT) scan of the abdomen
confirmed dilatation of her distal small bowel, which
was more marked in the pre-anastomotic loop, with a
calcified obstructive intraluminal formation (Figure 2).
Her gallbladder presented with a high number of stones
which were adjoined to her intestinal wall. Therefore the
patient underwent a colonoscopy which confirmed an
anastomotic sub-stenosis that could not be explored
with a standard endoscope. We performed a mechanical
dilation with a control radial expansion (CRE) balloon
catheter (Boston Scientific Corp Marlborough, USA)
up to 18mm in diameter (Figure 3). There were three

Figure 3 Ileocolonic anastomosis after pneumatic dilatation.

calcified masses in her small bowel (Figure 4), two of
which were recovered using a Dormia basket (Cook En-
doscopy, Bloomington, USA) (Figure 5). The third, lager
than 20mm, did not exceed the ileocolic anastomosis
and therefore was treated with ESWL. She underwent
two sessions of ESWL. A 30mm calcified biliary stone
was identified just proximal to her ileocolic anastomosis;
it was fragmented and removed during a subsequent
colonoscopy. Unexpectedly, after the stone removal, an
apricot shell was identified and retrieved with a Roth net
retriever (US Endoscopy, Mentor, USA) (Figure 6). A
subsequent magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography
(MRCP) did not find a biliary-enteric fistula or pneumobi-
lia, although there was the presence of gallstones in the
small bowel.

She reported a resolution of the occlusive symptoms;
the surgeon chose to avoid a cholecystectomy because
she was considered a high-risk patient. At six months
after discharge she has remained without reoccurrence
of symptoms.

Figure 2 Computed tomography scan showing the stone in the
terminal ileum. Arrow indicates gallstone.

Figure 4 Stones in the small bowel above the anastomosis.

Pezzoli et al. Journal of Medical Case Reports 2015, 9:15
http://www.jmedicalcasereports.com/content/9/1/15

Page 3 of 5

detected, but the presence of a narrow anastomosis
might have helped the growth of the stones. Indeed, the
alteration of the bile salts in the enterohepatic circuit
following an ileum resection or in patients with Crohn’s
disease is a well-known phenomenon [6], and our pa-
tient had previously undergone an ileal resection that
might have caused the development of the stone.

A preoperative diagnosis of gallstone ileus is challen-
ging. The clinical presentation can be characterized by
non-specific symptoms and it usually depends on the
localisation and the nature of the obstruction (partial or
full). However, in cases of a clinical history of gallstones,
clinical signs of cholecystitis and bowel obstruction, gall-
stone ileus can be strongly suspected. The onset can
manifest as acute, intermittent or chronic episodes.

Plain abdominal X-rays, abdominal ultrasound and CT
scans may reveal signs of gallstone ileus and help in the
preoperative diagnosis and management of this disease.
The Rigler’s triad of radiological
features consists of
mechanical bowel obstruction, pneumobilia and ectopic
stone within the intestinal lumen [7]. The presence of
the Rigler triad in a plain abdominal radiography varies
between 17 and 87%; if present, two out of three signs
are considered to be sufficient to establish a diagnosis.
Only 15% of gallstones are sufficiently calcified to be
visualized as radiopaque in a plain abdominal X-ray or
CT. In our case report, this sign was evident but we can
speculate that only the bigger stone was radiopaque and
that the apricot shell had helped the shock-wave treat-
ment, working as a marker. All other imaging techniques
performed, including the MRCP, were not able to clearly
identify the fistula or
the pneumobilia. A possible
explanation for this phenomenon may be found in the
modified anatomy of the bowel of our patient that led to
an increase in size of the stone, due to the sedimentation
of intestinal content; moreover, the presence of bowel
stenosis caused the gallstone ileus.

Controversy remains about the management of gall-
stone ileus. Although spontaneous resolution of gall-
stone ileus are described [8], it generally causes acute
bowel obstruction, and the aim of treatment is gallstone
extraction. An enterolithotomy with stone extraction,
followed (or not) by elective biliary surgery, is the ther-
apy of choice. No other approach is clearly identified as
superior. The one-stage procedure (enterotomy, fistula
repair and cholecystectomy) is strongly associated with a
greater mortality rate, largely due to a delayed diagnosis
and concomitant diseases [9]. On the other hand, per-
forming the biliary surgery (colocistectomy) and the fis-
tula repair at the same time
reduces complications
related to gallstones disease, including recurrent ileus.
The two-stage procedure (enterolithotomy followed by
cholecystectomy and repair of the biliodigestive fistula
after four to six weeks) is an alternative treatment that is

Figure 5 Stone retrieved with a Dormia basket.

Discussion
Gallstone ileus is a rare bowel obstruction caused by
gallstones; the most frequent mechanism is the migra-
tion of stones through a gallbladder-duodenal
fistula
[1-3]. Often gallstone ileus is the consequence of an
episode of acute cholecystitis and gallbladder adhesion
to the bowel. This condition is more frequent in women,
given the known prevalence of gallbladder disease in this
gender, and in patients over 65 years. The size of the
stone represents a key factor in the development of the
disease, as a stone bigger than 2.5cm can cause a bowel
obstruction; nonetheless even smaller stones can cause
gallstone ileus in cases of stenosis. The gallstone usually
impacts the terminal
ileus or the ileocecal valve, al-
though colonic gallstones can happen when there is a
gallbladder-colon fistula [4]. However, rare cases of gall-
stone ileus have been reported even in absence of a
bilioenteric fistula, as in this study [5]. This can be
explained by the entrance of the stone through the Vater
papilla. In our case report a bilioenteric fistula was not

Figure 6 Apricot shell retrieved with a Roth net.

Pezzoli et al. Journal of Medical Case Reports 2015, 9:15
http://www.jmedicalcasereports.com/content/9/1/15

Page 4 of 5

suggested for younger patients and in cases of recurrent
biliary symptoms [10]. Laparoscopic procedures can be
an alternative method, although a surgeon with specialist
experience in advanced laparoscopic surgery would be
necessary [11]. The endoscopic treatment of gallstone
ileus is a valid alternative approach and some cases have
already been reported [12-14]. Ultrasound-guided ESWL
has also been suggested as a non-invasive alternative
to surgery to fragment the stone and solve the sub-
occlusion [3].

In our case report, the nuanced presentation and the
possibility to access the obstruction endoscopically sug-
gested a conservative treatment approach. This case
shows some different
features when compared with
cases described elsewhere. First of all, the age of our pa-
tient was uncommon, since gallstone ileus is more fre-
quent in patients over 65 years of age [1]. The presence
of an apricot shell represents a clinical curiosity, but was
also a sign of a difficult enteric transit from the ileocolic
anastomosis that could be responsible for the growth of
the stones. In fact, a bilioenteric fistula was not diag-
nosed in our patient. Moreover, she denied having eaten
apricots in the most recent months prior to her symp-
toms and the stone most likely had been there for a con-
siderable time and contributed to the bowel obstruction.
An endoscopic dilatation allowed us to remove two
stones but a bigger third stone required an ESWL. We
did not have to place a radiopaque marker to guide the
ESWL, unlike in a previous case [14], because this time
the stone was calcified and clearly visible. Moreover, the
apricot shell was well visualized at the X-ray during the
ESWL and underwent an ESWL, since it had been mis-
understood with a stone. The conservative approach
taken in our case of dilatation of ileocolic stenosis result-
ing in the endoscopic removal of the gallstones success-
fully resolved the disease. The success of this treatment
is linked to the localisation and size of the obstruction.
The unusual presence of an apricot shell could have
contributed to the intestinal occlusion but, paradoxically,
facilitated the treatment of ESWL. Since there is
evidence showing that only 10% of patients require sec-
ondary biliary surgery [15], in selected patients, a com-
bination of endoscopic and ESWL treatment could give
positive results.

Conclusions
Our case report demonstrates that gallstones may enter
the gastrointestinal tract through the Vater papilla and
later increase in size. The presence of a narrow tract of
intestine can facilitate the incidence of gallstone ileus.
Given the variability of gallstone ileus presentation,
the treatment may not necessarily require a surgical
treatment. In our case report, colonoscopy and ESWL
were the non-invasive approaches
that allowed for

diagnosis and treatment simultaneously. Available data
does not show a higher rate of recurrent biliary disease,
therefore in selected patients conservative treatment
may be a curative therapy.

Consent
Written informed consent was obtained from the patient
for publication of this case report and any accompanying
images. A copy of the written consent is available for re-
view by the Editor-in-Chief of this journal.

Abbreviations
ERCP: Endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography; ESWL: Ultrasound-guided
extracorporeal shock wave lithotripsy; CT: Computed tomography; MRCP: Magnetic
resonance cholangiopancreatography.

Competing interests
The authors declare that they have no competing interests.

Authors’ contributions
AP performed the endoscopic procedures, analyzed and interpreted our
patient’s data. AM was a major contributor in writing the manuscript.
EP has been involved in drafting the manuscript and revisited it critically for
important intellectual content. NF has made substantial contributions in
drafting the manuscript. All authors have read and approved the final
manuscript.

Acknowledgements
We acknowledge Dr Roberto Galeotti for providing the CT scan images and
their interpretation.

Author details
1Department of Gastroenterology and Endoscopy Unit, Sant’Anna University
Hospital, v. A. Moro 8 203, 44124, Cona, Ferrara, Italy. 2Department of Applied
Health Research, University College London, 1-19 Torrington Place, London
WC1E7HB, UK.

Received: 6 October 2014 Accepted: 8 December 2014
Published: 2 March 2015

References
1. Masannat Y, Masannat Y, Shatnawei A. Gallstone ileus: a review. Mount Sinai

J Med. 2006;73:1132–4.

2. Moberg AC, Montgomery A. Laparoscopically assisted or open

enterolithotomy for gallstone ileus. Br J Surg. 2007;94:53–7.

5.

4.

3. Meyenberger C, Michel C, Metzger U, Koelz HR. Gallstone ileus treated by
extracorporeal shockwave lithotripsy. Gastrointest Endosc. 1996;43:508–11.
Reisner RM, Cohen JR. Gallstone ileus. A review of 1001 cases. Am Surg.
1994;60:441–6.
Armitage G, Fowweather FS, Johnstone AS. Observation of bileacid
enteroliths with an account of a recent case. Br J Surg. 1950;38:21–5.
Andersson H, Bosaeus I, Fasth S, Hellberg R, Hultén L. Cholelithiasis and
urolithiasis in Crohn’s disease. Scand J Gastroenterol. 1987;22:253–6.
Rigler LG, Borman CN, Noble JF. Gallstone obstruction: pathogenesis and
roentgen manifestations. J Am Med Assoc. 1941;117:1753–9.
Tandon A, Usha T, Satish KB, Bhatt S, Bhargava S, Prakash M, et al.
Resolution of gallstone ileus with spontaneous evacuation of gallstone: a
case report. Indian J Surg. 2013;75:228–31.

6.

7.

8.

9. Warshaw AL, Bartlett MK. Choice of operation for gallstone intestinal

obstruction. Ann Surg. 1966;164:1051–5.

10. Zaliekas J, Munson L. Complications of gallstones: the Mirizzi syndrome,
gallstone ileus, gallstone pancreatitis, complications of “lost” gallstones.
Surg Clin NAm. 2008;88:1349–55.
Ferraina P, Gancedo MC, Elli F, Nallar M, Ferraro A, Sarotto L, et al.
Video-assisted laparoscopic enterolithotomy: new technique in the surgical
management of gallstone ileus. Surg Laparosc Endosc Percutan Tech.
2003;13:83–7.

11.

Pezzoli et al. Journal of Medical Case Reports 2015, 9:15
http://www.jmedicalcasereports.com/content/9/1/15

Page 5 of 5

12.

13.

Lubbers H, Mahlke R, Lankisch PG. Gallstone ileus: endoscopic removal of a
gallstone obstructing the upper jejunum. J Inter Med. 1999;246:593–7.
Katsinelos P, Dimiropoulos S, Tsolkas P, Baltagiannis S, Kapelidis P,
Galanis I, et al. Successful treatment of duodenal bulb obstruction caused
by a gallstone (Bouveret’s syndrome) after endoscopic mechanical
lithotripsy. Surg Endosc. 2002;16:1363.

14. Muratori R, Cennamo V, Menna P, Cecinato P, Eusebi LH, Mazzella G, et al.

Colonic gallstone ileus treated with radiologically guided extracorporeal
shock wave lithotripsy followed by endoscopic extraction. Endoscopy.
2012;44:E88–9.

15. Chou JW, Hsu CH, Liao KF, Lai HC, Cheng KS, Peng CY, et al. Gallstone ileus:

report of two cases and review of the literature. World J Gastroenterol.
2007;13:1295–8.

doi:10.1186/1752-1947-9-15
Cite this article as: Pezzoli et al.: Gallstone ileus treated with non-surgical
conservative methods: a case report. Journal of Medical Case Reports
2015 9:15.

Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central
and take full advantage of: 

• Convenient online submission

• Thorough peer review

• No space constraints or color ﬁgure charges

• Immediate publication on acceptance

• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar

• Research which is freely available for redistribution

Submit your manuscript at 
www.biomedcentral.com/submit

