Siow et al. Journal of Medical Case Reports  (2015) 9:49 
DOI 10.1186/s13256-015-0519-6

JOURNAL OF MEDICAL
CASE REPORTS

CA SE R EP O R T
Successful laparoscopic management of
paraesophageal hiatal hernia with upside-down
intrathoracic stomach: a case report
Sze Li Siow1,2*, Sze Chee Tee1 and Chee Ming Wong1,2

Open Access

Abstract

Introduction: Paraesophageal hernia with intrathoracic mesentericoaxial type of gastric volvulus is a rare clinical
entity. The rotation occurs because of the idiopathic relaxation of the gastric ligaments and ascent of the stomach
adjacent to the oesophagus through the hiatus defect, while the gastroesophageal junction remains in the
abdomen. The open approach remains the gold standard therapy for most patients. Here we report the case of a
patient with such a condition who underwent a successful laparoscopic surgery. A literature search revealed that
this is the first case report from Southeast Asia.
Case presentation: A 55-year-old Chinese woman presented to us with symptoms suggestive of gastric outlet
obstruction for one year. A chest radiograph showed an air bubble with air-fluid level in her left thoracic cavity,
where a diaphragmatic hernia was initially suspected. A computed tomography scan and barium swallow study
demonstrated the presence of a type III paraesophageal hernia with intrathoracic upside-down stomach. A laparoscopy
was performed and the herniated stomach was successfully reduced into the abdomen. The mediastinal part of the
hernial sac was excised. Adequate intraabdominal length of oesophagus was achieved after resection of the sac and
circumferential oesophageal dissection. A lateral releasing incision was made adjacent to the right crus to facilitate
crural closure. The diaphragmatic defect and the hiatal closure were covered with a composite mesh. A Toupet
fundoplication was performed to recreate the antireflux valve. She had an uneventful recovery. She had no relapse of
previous symptoms at her six-month follow-up assessment.
Conclusions: Laparoscopic repair of such a condition can be accomplished successfully and safely when it is
performed with meticulous attention to the details of the surgical technique.
Keywords: Laparoscopy, Upside-down stomach, Gastric volvulus, Hiatal hernia, Fundoplication

Introduction
Gastric volvulus is classified into three types according
to the axis of rotation: organoaxial (rotation around the
long axis connecting the cardia and the pylorus); mesen-
tericoaxial (rotation around the short axis connecting
the lesser and greater curvatures) and combined (rota-
tion around both the short and long axis). The mesen-
tericoaxial type, as in our case, is a less common variant,
occurring in 29% of cases [1]. The combination of a
mesentericoaxial type of gastric volvulus and an intra-
thoracic location of the stomach is a rare clinical entity.

* Correspondence: szeli18@yahoo.com
1Department of Surgery, Jalan Hospital, 93586 Kuching, Sarawak, Malaysia
2Department of Surgery, Faculty of Medicine and Health Sciences, Universiti
Malaysia Sarawak, 94300 Kota Samarahan, Kuching, Sarawak, Malaysia

Even though sporadic cases of intrathoracic gastric vol-
vulus associated with paraesophageal hernia (PEH) have
been reported in Europe and the United States, it is very
rare in Southeast Asia. To the best of our knowledge,
this is the first report from this region documenting this
rare type of gastric volvulus entity with successful treat-
ment using a laparoscopic approach.

Case presentation
A 55-year-old Chinese woman presented with a history
of left hypochondrial pain for a duration of one year, as-
sociated with early satiety and postprandial vomiting.
She did not report any reflux symptoms. Her physical
examination did not reveal any significant abnormality.
An upper endoscopy did not show any evidence of

© 2015 Siow et al.; licensee BioMed Central. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and
reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly credited. The Creative Commons Public Domain
Dedication waiver (http://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/) applies to the data made available in this article,
unless otherwise stated.

Siow et al. Journal of Medical Case Reports  (2015) 9:49 

Page 2 of 6

reflux oesophagitis, except for a severely deformed stom-
ach with difficult duodenal intubation. However, a chest
radiograph showed an air bubble with air-fluid level in
her left thoracic cavity, and a diaphragmatic hernia was
initially suspected. A computed tomography (CT) scan
of her abdomen and a barium swallow study (Figure 1a)
confirmed a diagnosis of PEH with intrathoracic mesen-
tericoaxial gastric volvulus.

The surgery was performed with her in a modified
lithotomy position, under general anaesthesia. The sur-
geon stood between her legs (the French position), with
the camera surgeon at her right side and the assistant
at her left side. Five trocars were used (Figure 2): one
supraumbilical 12mm camera port, one 11mm left mid-
clavicular right-hand working port, one 5mm right
midclavicular left-hand working port, one 5mm left an-
terior axillary retraction port and one 5mm subxi-
phoid Nathanson liver retractor port (Cook Medical,
Bloomington, USA). The initial entry into the abdo-
men was obtained with a bladeless 12mm trocar (XCEL®,
Ethicon Endo-surgery, Cincinnati, USA) under direct
telescopic visualization using a 10mm 0° laparoscope
(Karl Storz Endoscopy, Tuttlingen, Germany). Once all
the trocars were inserted, she was tilted into the reverse
Trendelenburg position (20 to 30°).

Initially, the herniated stomach was reduced using
atraumatic graspers
(Johan, Karl Storz Endoscopy,
Tuttlingen, Germany) (Figure 3a). Gentle ‘hand-over-
hand’ traction was applied to the stomach until complete
reduction was achieved. Next, dissection of the hernia
sac started below the hiatal rim. Division of the attenu-
ated phreno-oesophageal ligament where it attached to
the hiatal rim was made, followed by correct identifica-
tion of the plane between the right crus and the hernia
sac (Figure 3b). The sac was dissected and separated
from the mediastinum, using a combination of sharp
and blunt dissection (Figure 3c). The separation was
assisted by pulling the cut edge of the sac into abdomen.

Complete circumferential dissection of the sac as a
whole was done in two parts, first the anterior and lat-
eral sac in one piece, followed by the posterior sac.
When performing retro-oesophageal dissection, care
was taken to preserve the posterior vagus nerve. A
nylon tape was then passed behind the oesophagus at
the level of the oesophagogastric junction to sling the
oesophagus upwards to allow further circumferential
dissection of the oesophagus. In addition, the use of a
sling prevented direct grasping of the oesophagus for
retraction, thus avoiding possible injury to it. The dis-
section was completed when the mediastinal sac had
been retracted down beyond the lower oesophagus and
over the proximal stomach.

The redundant portion of the sac was excised with an
ultrasonic scalpel (Harmonic®, Ethicon, Cincinnati, USA)
taking care to avoid injury to the oesophageal and stom-
ach wall. A wide hiatus was visualized after the dissec-
tion (Figure 3d), making it impossible to approximate
the crura. A lateral releasing incision adjacent to the
right crus was subsequently made with an ultrasonic
shear (Harmonic®, Ethicon, Cincinnati, USA) (Figure 3e),
allowing primary closure of the hiatus posterior to the
oesophagus with three interrupted Ethibond™ 2/0 su-
tures (Ethicon, Cincinnati, USA) using intracorporeal
knots (Figure 3f). A composite mesh (Proceed®, Ethicon,
Johnson & Johnson Medical, Norderstedt, Germany) was
later placed over the diaphragmatic defect and the poster-
ior crural closure, and secured by tack fixation (Figure 3g).
A Toupet (posterior 270°) fundoplication was performed
to recreate the anti-reflux valve (Figure 3h). The poster-
ior fundus was first fixed to the right crus using Ethi-
bond™ 2/0 sutures, followed by four more similar sutures
between the fundus and each side of the oesophagus.

Postoperatively, she was started on oral liquids on the
evening of the surgery and she rapidly progressed to a
soft diet, remaining on this diet for four weeks. She was
discharged on postoperative day one. A barium swallow

Figure 1 Barium swallow study showing the upside-down appearance of the stomach in the thorax with the subdiaphragmatic
location of the gastroesophageal junction before surgery (a) and normal subdiaphragmatic position of the stomach one month
after the surgery (b).

Siow et al. Journal of Medical Case Reports  (2015) 9:49 

Page 3 of 6

Figure 2 Port position. 1: Supraumbilical 12-mm camera port; 2: Left mid-clavicular 11-mm right-hand working port; 3: Right mid-clavicular
5-mm left-hand working port; 4: Subxiphoid 5-mm liver retraction port and 5: Left anterior axillary 5-mm retraction port. (Black denotes 11 to 12
mm ports and red denotes 5mm ports).

study at one month after surgery showed a normally lo-
cated stomach (Figure 1b). At a follow-up review of six
months, she was well, with no relapse of symptoms.

Discussion
PEH is an uncommon condition, with a reported inci-
dence of 5% out of all hiatal hernias. It is classified as
one of three types: type II (true PEH), type III (a mixed
paraesophageal and sliding hernia) or type IV (contains
viscera other than the stomach). Approximately 90% are
type III and the other 10% are type II or IV [2]. Type III
PEH, as in our case report, occurs more commonly in
elderly and probably evolves from type I as a result of
hernial enlargement [3]. Nevertheless, the natural history
of PEH is poorly understood. Gastric volvulus is a
known complication of PEH. The finding of an intratho-
racic upside-down stomach in our patient is due to the
ascent of stomach adjacent to the oesophagus and the
idiopathic relaxation of gastric ligaments, while the gas-
troesophageal junction remained in the abdomen.

Our patient’s diagnosis was suspected from the finding
of a retrocardiac air bubble with or without air-fluid
level on the lateral view of a chest radiograph. The dif-
ferential diagnoses to be considered included diaphrag-
matic and PEH. A CT scan of the chest and abdomen
can provide information on the type of hernia. A barium
swallow test can confirm the type of PEH, and provides
information on rotation of the stomach, as in our case.
An upper endoscopy is mandatory to exclude the pres-
ence of oesophagitis or Barrett’s oesophagus that may
have resulted in a shortened oesophagus. However, the
procedure may be complicated by difficult intubation of
the duodenum due to the malrotation of the stomach.

Elective repair is generally indicated for symptomatic
PEH in otherwise fit patients with large hiatal hernias
[4,5]. It is the preferred option as emergency surgery is
associated with a higher rate of morbidity and mortality,
as demonstrated in a population-based study [4]. How-
ever, in asymptomatic or minimally symptomatic PEH,
the traditional rationale of prophylactically repairing all
PEH in order to prevent life-threatening complications

Siow et al. Journal of Medical Case Reports  (2015) 9:49 

Page 4 of 6

Figure 3 Operative steps. a) Reduction of the stomach from the thorax into the abdomen; b) Resection of the hernial sac started below the
hiatal rim with division of the phreno-oesophageal ligament to correctly identify the plane between the mediastinal sac and the right crus;
c) Dissecting the sac from the mediastinum; d) The wide hiatus visualized after dissection; e) Lateral releasing incision made adjacent to the right
crus; f) Posterior approximation of the crura using Ethibond™ 2/0 sutures; g) Overlying of the composite mesh over the diaphragmatic defect and
crus, secured with tacks; h) Formation of the Toupet fundoplication.

has been challenged in recent years, with the suggestion
that
this group of patients could be managed non-
operatively [5]. Stylopoulos et al., in a pooled analysis of
several studies, estimated that the annual risk of PEH
developing acute symptoms requiring surgery in such
group of patients is 1.1% [5]. They also highlighted the
overestimation of
the mortality rate associated with
emergency surgery, previously reported to be more than
40%, to be 5.4%.

The management of PEH has evolved over the last
decade, from open thoracic to open abdominal and fi-
nally laparoscopic transabdominal approaches. The para-
digm shift in treatment is attributed to the development
and refinement of
laparoscopic techniques for anti-
reflux surgery and improvement in modern laparoscopic
equipment and energy devices. Since the first description
of the laparoscopic approach for large PEH in 1992
[6], it has become apparent that the laparoscopic ap-
proach is associated with significantly lower perioperative

morbidity and shortened convalescence when compared
to laparotomy or thoracotomy.

The key issues surrounding the laparoscopic repair of
PEH are: (1) shortened oesophagus, (2) the need to ex-
cise the mediastinal hernia sac, (3) the method of crural
closure and (4) the need to perform a gastropexy.

Shortened oesophagus is a real and important clinical
entity in patients with PEH, with a reported incidence of
11% [7]. It is thought to arise as a result of either
chronic inflammation or anatomic changes associated
with herniation [7]. Careful preoperative endoscopic
evaluation for the presence of either circumferential
oesophagitis or Barrett’s oesophagus is important, as
they may indicate the degree of perioesophageal inflam-
mation, and possibly loss of oesophageal compliance and
length. The final diagnosis of shortened oesophagus is
always made in the operating theatre after adequate
circumferential oesophageal mobilization. The failure to
gain an adequate intraabdominal length of the oesophagus

Siow et al. Journal of Medical Case Reports  (2015) 9:49 

Page 5 of 6

mandates an oesophageal lengthening procedure, such
as a Collis gastroplasty, which should only be used
sparingly or when absolute necessarily, as the proced-
ure is associated with morbidity related to gastric resec-
tion and stapling [7]. Further, it results in the retention
of acid-producing parietal cells in the neo-oesophagus
above the intact fundoplication [7]. Nevertheless, most
authors agree with the fact that the required length of
the intraabdominal oesophagus is nearly always attain-
able with a complete resection of the mediastinal sac
and circumferential oesophageal mobilization [7,8].

it allows for the descent of

The resection of mediastinal sac achieves several other
objectives. Firstly,
the
oesophagus into its normal position. Secondly, it elimi-
nates the serous membrane lining the cavity of the medi-
astinum, thus reducing the risk of seroma. Thirdly, it
eliminates the traction on the stomach that may cause
recurrence of intrathoracic hernia [9]. Our patient did
not have reflux symptoms nor was there any evidence of
oesophagitis or Barrett’s oesophagus on an endoscopic
assessment. We were able to achieve an intraabdominal
oesophageal
length of 3cm after adopting the above-
mentioned technique, with the aid of nylon tape at the
gastroesophageal junction. The redundant sac over the
upper stomach was resected to facilitate identification
of
the anterior oesophagus and gastro-oesophageal
junction.

The use of meshes in hiatal repair is controversial be-
cause of the concern of mesh-related complications. A
mesh is used to reinforce the crural repair because it has
been observed that failure of the crural closure, occur-
ring in 5.7 to 11% of patients, is the main reason for
postoperative intrathoracic migration of the Nissen fun-
dic wrap following laparoscopic antireflux surgery [10].
The risk of hernial recurrence is proportionate to the
size of the hiatal defect [11]. Generally, a reinforced hia-
toplasty is recommended for patients with a hiatal size
of more than 5cm2 to decrease the risk of hernial recur-
rence [11]. Two prospective randomized trials have
demonstrated a significant reduction of recurrence when
using mesh for crural closure [10,12]. Another study ob-
served that a change in practice from primary crural re-
pair in Nissen fundoplication to tension-free hiatoplasty
using a polypropylene mesh led to a zero incidence of
postoperative wrap herniation, in contrast to an earlier
incidence of 13.8% [13].

While there are concerns of mesh-related complica-
tions, most authors did not report such untoward
complications [10,12,13]. One consideration for mesh
reinforcement
the mesh, which
should not be in contact with the posterior aspect of the
oesophagus, but with the posterior fundic wrap [10,13].
Other important considerations for mesh reinforcement
of the hiatal closure are that: (1) the inert muscular

is the placement of

to retraction of

properties of hiatal fibres that are poor in satellite cells
and extracellular content, important in the cicatrization
process, leads to a weakness in the scar tissue [13] and
(2) change in direction of tension during inspiration,
normally directed toward the vertebral insertion of the
crura in normal circumstances,
the
muscle fibres of the hiatus when the crura are sutured
together [13]. In our patient, laparoscopic closure of the
crura was not possible as both the crura were wide
apart. We were left with the option of either patching
the enlarged hiatus without crural approximation (leav-
ing the passage for the oesophagus) in a true tension-
free repair, or to perform a relaxing incision over the
right crus to facilitate primary closure of the hiatus,
followed by the use of on-lay mesh to cover the defect
or to buttress the crural repair. The concept of tension-
free repair using mesh is the most ideal approach in any
hernial repair. We were concerned about the rupture of
the mesh and recurrent herniation if our patient were to
have excessive coughing or retching during the immedi-
ate postoperative period. Therefore, we performed a
lateral releasing longitudinal incision in the diaphragm
adjacent to the right crus in order to achieve crural
approximation. The Proceed® composite mesh used in
this case is made of polypropylene on one side and
oxidized regenerated cellulose layer on the other side
which minimizes bowel adhesions. The rationale of
using a mesh in our case was to reinforce the diaphrag-
matic defect and the crural closure, as there was concern
for disruption since both crura had been approximated
under tension.

An antireflux procedure was performed as part of the
repair as it has been shown that most patients with a
PEH have evidence of reflux on pH monitoring [14], and
failure to perform an antireflux procedure has been
shown to result in postoperative reflux in 20% of pa-
tients [3]. In addition, patients without preoperative re-
flux may develop postoperative reflux, attributable to
dissection and mobilization of the gastro-oesophageal
junction [15]. Our patient had no symptoms of reflux,
most probably attributed to the presence of a distorted
gastroesophageal
junction of the intrathoracic upside-
down stomach. A Toupet fundoplication was performed
as a partial wrap was the procedure of choice for laparo-
scopic antireflux surgery in our department. The inter-
position of the wrap between the mesh and the posterior
oesophageal wall prevents direct contact of the oesopha-
gus against the mesh. The evidence to support the ideal
type of
fundoplication is lacking, with both partial
(Toupet or Dor) and complete (Nissen) wrap being
described. In general terms, the main objectives of a
fundoplication are to anchor the stomach at its sub-
diaphragmatic position and to effectively control the
gastroesophageal reflux disease [7].

Siow et al. Journal of Medical Case Reports  (2015) 9:49 

Page 6 of 6

9.

Edye M, Salky B, Posner A, Fierer A. Sac excision is essential to adequate
laparoscopic repair of paraesophageal hernia. Surg Endosc. 1998;12:1259–63.

10. Granderath FA, Schweiger UM, Kamolz T, Asche KU, Pointner R.

Laparoscopic Nissen fundoplication with prosthetic hiatal closure reduces
postoperative intrathoracic wrap herniation: preliminary results of a
prospective randomized functional and clinical study. Arch Surg.
2005;140:40–8.

11. Granderath FA, Schweiger UM, Pointner R. Laparoscopic antireflux surgery:

tailoring the hiatal closure to the size of hiatal surface area. Surg Endosc.
2007;21:542–8.
Frantzides CT, Richards CG, Carlson MA. Laparoscopic repair of large hiatal
hernia with polytetrafluoroethylene. Surg Endosc. 1999;13:906–8.

12.

13. Basso N, Deo Leo A, Genco A, Rosato P, Rea S, Spaziani E, et al. 360°

laparoscopic fundoplication with tension-free hiatoplasty in the treatment of
symptomatic gastroesophageal reflux disease. Surg Endosc. 2000;14:164–9.
14. Walther B, DeMeester TR, Lafontaine E, Courtney JV, Little AG, Skinner DB.
Effect of paraesophageal hernia on sphincter function and its implication
on surgical therapy. Am J Surg. 1984;147:111–6.
Ellis Jr FH, Crozier RE, Shea JA. Paraesophageal hiatus hernia. Arch Surg.
1986;121:416–20.

15.

The role of an anterior gastropexy to prevent intraab-
dominal gastric volvulus remains controversial. In our
case, we did not perform gastropexy, as the Toupet
fundoplication with its wrap anchored to the oesophagus
and right crus will
inevitably prevent any recurrent
volvulus.

Conclusions
Our case highlights a successful laparoscopic approach
to PEH with intrathoracic gastric volvulus and docu-
ments the use of a lateral releasing incision to facilitate
crural closure and the placement of a mesh to reinforce
a diaphragmatic defect and hiatal closure. However, the
routine use of these two techniques as part of a PEH re-
pair need to be examined in a large prospective random-
ized study with a long-term follow-up period.

Consent
Written informed consent was obtained from the patient
for publication of this case report and accompanying im-
ages. A copy of the written consent is available for re-
view by the Editor-in-Chief of this journal.

Abbreviations
PEH: Paraesophageal hernia; CT: Computed tomography.

Competing interests
The authors declare that they have no competing interests.

Authors’ contributions
All authors were actively involved in direct patient care and have read and
approved the final manuscript. SLS is the principal author and was the chief
surgeon performing the surgery. SCT was the assistant surgeon and involved
in the collection of data. CMW was involved in the proofreading of the
manuscript.

Acknowledgements
The author(s) would like to thank the Director General of Health Malaysia for
permission to publish this paper. We also thank Jacinta Lim for the
illustration in Figure 2.

Received: 25 November 2014 Accepted: 8 January 2015

References
1. Milne LW, Hunter JJ, Anshus JS, Rosen P. Gastric volvulus: two cases and a

2.

3.

4.

5.

6.

7.

8.

review of the literature. J Emerg Med. 1994;12:299–306.
Hazzan D, Chin EH, Salky B. A review of laparoscopic paraesophageal hernia
repair. Eur Surg. 2007;39:174–9.
Trus TL, Bax T, Richardson WS, Branum GD, Mauren SJ, Swanstrom LL, et al.
Complications of laparoscopic paraesophageal hernia repair. J Gastrointest
Surg. 1997;1:221–8.
Jassim H, Seligman JT, Frelich M, Goldblatt M, Kastenmeier A, Wallace J, et al. A
population-based analysis of emergent versus elective paraesophageal hernia
repair using Nationwide Inpatient Sample. Surg Endosc. 2014;28:3473–8.
Stylopoulos N, Gazelle GS, Rattner DW. Paraesophageal hernias: operation or
observation? Ann Surg. 2002;236:492–501.
Cuschieri A, Shimi S, Nathanson LK. Laparoscopic reduction, crural repair,
and fundoplication of large hiatal hernia. Am J Surg. 1992;163:425–30.
Gould J. Laparoscopic paraesophageal hernia repair. In: Chen H, editor.
Illustrative Handbook of General Surgery. London: Springer; 2010. p. 73–80.
O’Rourke RW, Khajanchee YS, Urbach DR, Lee NN, Lockhart B, Hansen PD,
et al. Extended transmediastinal dissection: an alternative to gastroplasty for
short esophagus. Arch Surg. 2003;138:735–40.

Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central
and take full advantage of: 

• Convenient online submission

• Thorough peer review

• No space constraints or color ﬁgure charges

• Immediate publication on acceptance

• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar

• Research which is freely available for redistribution

Submit your manuscript at 
www.biomedcentral.com/submit

