Chiba et al. Journal of Medical Case Reports  (2015) 9:71 
DOI 10.1186/s13256-015-0518-7

JOURNAL OF MEDICAL
CASE REPORTS

CA SE R EP O R T
Open Access
Urethral caruncle in a 9-year-old girl: a case report
and review of the literature
Masahiro Chiba1*, Akira Toki1, Akihide Sugiyama1, Rie Suganuma1, Shunsuke Osawa1, Rie Ishii1, Tomokazu Nakagami2,
Junichi Suzuki2, Yu Watarai2, Shinya Kawano3 and Koumei Suzuki3

Abstract

Introduction: Urethral caruncles are the most frequent benign tumors of the female urethra. Most of them are
found in post-menopausal women, and they are rare in childhood. Only a few pediatric cases have been published
in the literature. In this report, we present an unusual case of a pediatric patient with a urethral caruncle, along with
a review of the literature.
Case presentation: A 9-year-old Mongolian girl was referred to our hospital with a 2-week history of frequent
adherence of a small amount of blood to her underwear. We found a sessile smooth margin, a clear boundary
and an elastic, soft red tumor over the entire circumference of the urethral meatus. At the beginning, because
of the child’s age, urethral prolapse was suspected. There was no response after 3 weeks of conservative treatment with
steroid ointment. With the patient under general anesthesia, a partial tumor resection was performed for the purpose
of histological examination. The tumor excision was limited to about 1/2 laps of the urethral meatus to prevent
the development of urethral stricture. On the basis of clinical and histopathological examinations, a diagnosis of a
urethral caruncle was made. Post-operatively, steroid ointment application to residual masses was continued, and
these disappeared about 6 months later. Our patient was free of recurrence and had had no complications after
3 years of follow-up.
Conclusions: Urethral caruncles are rare in children, and the possibility of malignancy is slight during this period.
Biopsy of the mass is not required for diagnosis. It should be indicated only if the mass has other characteristics
that raise suspicion of malignancy. In previously reported cases, all of the tumor was removed. However, the
trigger of the caruncle in childhood is chronic inflammation. Conservative therapy with steroid ointment should
be the core treatment. However, it may be necessary to proceed to treatment because caruncles take a long time
to heal. The case that we describe in this report will serve as an example for similar cases in the future.
Keywords: Caruncles, Child, Female, Urethral

Introduction
Urethral caruncles are benign and pedunculated and ap-
pear as sessile polypoid lesions of the posterior lip of the
urethral meatus. They represent the most common lesion
of
the female urethra and occur primarily in post-
menopausal women [1,2]. Only 14 pediatric cases have
been published in the English-language literature to date
[3-6]. In this report, we present a case of a urethral car-
uncle in a 9-year-old girl and review the relevant literature.

* Correspondence: mc-psurg@med.showa-u.ac.jp
1Division of Pediatric Surgery, Department of Surgery, Showa University
School of Medicine, Showa University Hospital, 1-5-8 Hatanodai,
Shinagawa-ku, Tokyo 142-8666, Japan
Full list of author information is available at the end of the article

Case presentation
A 9-year-old Mongolian girl was referred to our hospital
with a 2-week history of frequent adherence of a small
amount of blood to her underwear. The girl’s mother’s
pregnancy and the girl’s birth and neonatal history were
uneventful. She had no history of hospitalization or sur-
gery. We found a sessile smooth margin, a clear boundary
and an elastic, soft red tumor over the entire circumfer-
ence of the urethral meatus (Figure 1a). The patient expe-
rienced no pain or difficulty with urinating, although the
tumor was hemorrhagic. No other abnormalities were
found during the physical examination. All of the results
of the complete blood count and biochemical examina-
tions were normal. At the beginning, because of the girl’s

© 2015 Chiba et al.; licensee BioMed Central. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and
reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly credited. The Creative Commons Public Domain
Dedication waiver (http://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/) applies to the data made available in this article,
unless otherwise stated.

Chiba et al. Journal of Medical Case Reports  (2015) 9:71 

Page 2 of 4

a   

b   

(Figure 1b). A histological examination revealed interstitial
edema with inflammatory cell infiltration, papillary hyper-
plasia of the connective tissue and coverage with stratified
squamous epithelium. There was no evidence of malig-
nant change throughout the specimen (Figure 2). On the
basis of the clinical and histopathological examinations,
the diagnosis of a urethral caruncle was made. Post-
operatively, steroid ointment application to residual
masses was continued, and these disappeared about 6
months later. Our patient was free of recurrence and
had no complications after 3 years of follow-up.

Discussion
Urethral caruncles are usually confined to the female ur-
ethra. They most often occur in middle-aged and elderly
women and are rarely found in young females [1,2]. A
total of 14 cases of young females have been described in
the English-language literature [3-6]. Because the details
of the 11 cases that Campbell reported [3] are unknown,
only 4 pediatric cases, including ours, are summarized in
Table 1. The polypoid lesions in pediatric cases were
present at the urethral meatus in all patients; in adult
patients, they occur most frequently at the posterior
lip. Unlike adult cases, bleeding was the only symptom
other than persistent pain or difficulty with urinating in
this case. In adult patients, chronic inflammation can
also be present, in addition to atrophy and curing of
the urethral mucosa due to decreased secretion of es-
trogen [7]. Therefore, a variety of symptoms associated
with reduced secretion of estrogen appear in adults, but
they differ in children. The trigger of the caruncle in
childhood is also chronic inflammation; however, the
exact etiology is unknown. The female urethra is particu-
larly susceptible to infection as well as to inflammation.

Figure 1 Photographs showing the pre- and post-operative
appearance of the lesion. (a) Pre-operative photograph showing
an elastic, soft red tumor originating from the urethral meatus. (b)
Post-operative appearance of the surgical site. The dorsal mass excision
was about 1/2 laps of the urethral meatus. (tumor resection: 10×15mm).

age, urethral prolapse was suspected. No clinical response
was achieved after 3 weeks of conservative treatment with
steroid ointment. The exclusion of malignant tumors such
as rhabdomyosarcoma and malignant lymphoma was
also required, so we performed enhanced computed tom-
ography. We observed no muscle layer invasion or distant
metastases. With the patient under general anesthesia, a
partial tumor resection was performed for the purpose of
histological examination. The tumor excision was limited
to about 1/2 laps of the urethral meatus, 10×15mm in
size, to prevent the development of urethral stricture

Figure 2 Microscopic image of the patient’s tumor. Histological
stain shows interstitial edema with inflammatory cell infiltration,
papillary hyperplasia of the connective tissue and coverage with
stratified squamous epithelium (hematoxylin and eosin stain; original
magnification, ×100).

Chiba et al. Journal of Medical Case Reports  (2015) 9:71 

Table 1 Summary of four cases reported in the literature
Patient
1

Site/size
Posterior lip of mid-urethra/0.6cm 1 wk conservative management,

Sex/age
F/2 yr, 5mo

Treatment

Histological type
Vasodilatation type

F/9 yr

Anterior lip of urethra/1.0cm

Complete resection

Vasodilatation type

complete resection

2

3

F/2 yr, 7mo

Posterior lip of urethra/0.7cm

Complete resection

Our patient

F/9 yr

All around the circumference
of urethra/2.0cm

3 wk conservative management,
partial resection, 6 mo conservative
management

F; female. yr; year. wk; week. mo; month.

Granulomatous type (included
intestinal heterotopia)

Granulomatous type

Page 3 of 4

Prognosis
No recurrence
for 2 yr

No recurrence
for 2 yr

Unknown

No recurrence
for 3 yr

Further study of the pathogenesis of urethral caruncles
may be required.

The clinical differential diagnosis for a urethral or peri-
urethral mass in pediatrics is urethral prolapse and peri-
urethral gland abscess. Although uncommon, a spectrum
of neoplasms may mimic urethral caruncle clinically, in-
cluding sarcoma [8]. Biopsy of the mass is not required for
diagnosis, but it should be indicated if the mass is irregu-
lar or has other characteristics that raise suspicion of
malignancy.

The management of such patients can be divided into
conservative treatment and surgical resection. Conserva-
tive therapy with application of estrogen ointment is com-
mon in adults [9], and steroid ointment is used in children
because chronic inflammation is also a trigger. In previ-
ously reported cases, short-term steroid ointment treat-
ment was ineffective and all of the tumor was ultimately
removed. Recurrences have also been seen in adult cases
[4], but the curability of these tumors with surgical resec-
tion is high in pediatric patients. No cases of recurrence
have been reported (Table 1). However, if the lesion covers
the entire circumference of the urethral meatus, as in our
patient, meatal stenosis after surgical excision is a poten-
tial problem [10]. Therefore, in our patient, we restricted
the surgery to a partial resection and made a pathological
diagnosis after the procedure. After surgery, we used a
long-term treatment period of 6 months, and the patient’s
urethral caruncle was completely cured with steroid
ointment. In conservative treatment, it may be necessary
to proceed to treatment, considering the fact that these
lesions take a long time to heal.

core treatment. However, it may be necessary to proceed
to treatment because these lesions take a long time to heal.
Because this disease is rare in children, the treatments
employed for our patient and in the other cases reported
in the literature should be borne in mind when such
patients are encountered. The case that we describe in
this report will serve as an example for similar cases in
the future.

Consent
Written informed consent was obtained from the patient’s
legal guardian for publication of this case report and any
accompanying images. A copy of the written consent is
available for review by the Editor-in-Chief of this journal.

Competing interests
The authors declare that they have no competing interests.

Authors’ contributions
MC wrote the manuscript and is the corresponding author. AT provided
significant advice. AS and RS performed histopathological examinations. SO,
RI, TN, JS, YW, SK and KS participated in the treatment of the patient. All
authors read and approved the final manuscript.

Author details
1Division of Pediatric Surgery, Department of Surgery, Showa University
School of Medicine, Showa University Hospital, 1-5-8 Hatanodai,
Shinagawa-ku, Tokyo 142-8666, Japan. 2Children’s Medical Center, Showa
University Northern Yokohama Hospital, 35-1 Chigasaki-chuo, Tsuzuki-ku,
Yokohama-shi, Kanagawa-ken 224-8503, Japan. 3Children’s Medical Center,
Showa University Koto Toyosu Hospital, 5-1-38 Toyosu, Kouto-ku, Tokyo
135-8577, Japan.

Received: 4 November 2014 Accepted: 8 January 2015

Conclusions
Urethral caruncles are rare in children, and the possibility
of malignancy is slight during this period. Biopsy of the
mass is not required for diagnosis. Biopsy should be in-
dicated only if the mass has other characteristics that
raise suspicion of malignancy. In previously reported cases,
all of the tumor was removed. However, the trigger of
caruncles in childhood is chronic inflammation. Con-
servative therapy with steroid ointment should be the

2.

3.

4.

5.

6.

References
1.

Reuter VE. Urethra. In: Bostwick D, Cheng L, editors. Urologic surgical
pathology. 2nd ed. Philadelphia: Mosby Elsevier; 2008. p. 595–613.
Conces MR, Williamson SR, Montironi R, Lopez-Beltran A, Scarpelli M, Cheng L.
Urethral caruncle: clinicopathologic features of 41 cases. Hum Pathol.
2012;43:1400–4.
Campbell MF. Radiologic diagnosis of urinary tract tumors in infants and
children. Radiology. 1950;54:646–58.
Jarvi OH, Marin S, de Boer WG. Further studies of intestinal heterotopia in
urethral caruncle. Acta Pathol Microbiol Immunol Scand A. 1984;92:469–74.
Türkeri L, Simşek F, Akdaş A. Urethral caruncle in an unusual location occurring
in prepubertal girl. Eur Urol. 1989;16:153–4.
Kim KK, Sin DY, Park HW. Urethral caruncle occurring in a young girl: a case
report. J Korean Med Sci. 1993;8:160–1.

Chiba et al. Journal of Medical Case Reports  (2015) 9:71 

Page 4 of 4

7.

8.

9.

Burkland CE. Common lesions of the urethra in women. Calif Med.
1952;76:69–73.
Nussbaum AR, Lebowitz RL. Interlabial masses in little girls: review and
imaging recommendations. AJR Am J Roentgenol. 1983;141:65–71.
North American Menopause Society. Management of symptomatic
vulvovaginal atrophy: 2013 position statement of the North American
Menopause Society. Menopause. 2013;20:888–904.

10. Becker LE. Urethral caruncle: a herald lesion for distal urethral stenosis?

J Natl Med Assoc. 1975;67:228–30.

Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central
and take full advantage of: 

• Convenient online submission

• Thorough peer review

• No space constraints or color ﬁgure charges

• Immediate publication on acceptance

• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar

• Research which is freely available for redistribution

Submit your manuscript at 
www.biomedcentral.com/submit

