Schneider et al. Journal of Medical Case Reports  (2015) 9:59 
DOI 10.1186/s13256-015-0524-9

JOURNAL OF MEDICAL
CASE REPORTS

Open Access

CA SE R EP O R T
Long-term observation of incremental response
and antibodies to voltage-gated calcium channels
in patients with Lambert–Eaton myasthenic
syndrome: two case reports
Ilka Schneider1, Malte E Kornhuber1 and Frank Hanisch1,2*

Abstract
Introduction: Lambert–Eaton myasthenic syndrome is a rare autoimmune disorder of neuromuscular transmission
due to the presence of antibodies to presynaptic P/Q-type voltage-gated calcium channels. The gold standard of
therapy is the potassium channel blocker 3,4-diaminopyridine. To the best of our knowledge, no clinical reports
have been published to date about long-term follow-up outcomes in patients who discontinued 3,4-diaminopyridine
therapy. In addition, we know of no recent articles in which the natural history in patients with autoimmune-mediated
Lambert–Eaton myasthenic syndrome has been addressed. In this report, we describe the cases of two such patients.
Case presentation: Patient 1 was a Caucasian man who had been diagnosed at age 15 years with Lambert–Eaton
myasthenic syndrome with symptoms of fluctuating muscle weakness and easy fatigability. These symptoms
stabilized, and his electrophysiological parameters normalized, during treatment with a maintenance dose of
50mg/day of 3,4-diaminopyridine. After 5.5 years, however, he wished to discontinue the treatment. After that
point, his electrophysiological parameters and presynaptic P/Q-type voltage-gated calcium-channel antibody
titer remained stable. During the 15-year follow-up period, patient 1 reported mild exertion-induced complaints
but did not feel restricted in his occupation and most daily activities. Patient 2 was a Caucasian man diagnosed
at 32 years of age with a moderate limb girdle syndrome. He was treated with up to 80mg/day of 3,4-diaminopyridine.
Because of the drug’s very short-lasting effect (<1 hour), however, he took it mostly irregularly (≤1×20mg/day). During
the 14- year period of observation, his repetitive nerve stimulation responses and presynaptic P/Q-type voltage-gated
calcium-channel antibody titer remained stable, his compound muscle action potential amplitudes were decreasing
and his clinical symptoms did not deteriorate. At his last follow-up examination, patient 2 was independent in all of his
daily activities.
Conclusion: Some patients with autoimmune-mediated Lambert–Eaton myasthenic syndrome show a stable clinical
long-term course without treatment. The benefit of each long-term therapy should be critically assessed during follow-up,
and possible side effects should be balanced against the quality of life in these patients.
Keywords: Lambert-Eaton myasthenic syndrome

* Correspondence: hanisch.frank@gmx.de
1Department of Neurology, Martin-Luther-University Halle-Wittenberg,
Ernst-Grube-Strasse 40, D-06120 Halle (Saale), Germany
2Department of Neurology, Vivantes Humboldt-Klinikum, Am Nordgraben 2,
D-13509 Berlin, Germany

© 2015 Schneider et al.; licensee BioMed Central. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and
reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly credited. The Creative Commons Public Domain
Dedication waiver (http://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/) applies to the data made available in this article,
unless otherwise stated.

Schneider et al. Journal of Medical Case Reports  (2015) 9:59 

Page 2 of 4

A

B

Figure 1 (See legend on next page.)

Schneider et al. Journal of Medical Case Reports  (2015) 9:59 

Page 3 of 4

(See figure on previous page.)
Figure 1 Disease course in patients 1 and 2. Graphs show data for antibodies to P/Q-type voltage-gated calcium channels, compound muscle
action potential amplitudes, incremental and decremental response over the course of the disease in patient 1 (A) and patient 2 (B). In both
patients a repetitive nerve stimulation test was performed using the belly tendon technique over the abductor digiti minimi (supramaximal
stimulation to record compound muscle action potential amplitudes at rest and after exercise for 30 seconds at 3-Hz stimulation). Mean skin
temperature: 32°C; pathological decrement: ≥10% difference between first and fifth compound muscle action potential amplitudes; pathological
increment: ≥100% compound muscle action potential amplitudes increase after exercise (Multiliner Vision electromyography system; VIASYS
Healthcare, Höchberg, Germany). The P/Q-type voltage-gated calcium channel antibodies were analyzed by radioabsorption assay (Angela
Vincent, John Radcliffe Hospital, Oxford, UK: upper limit of normal value <45pmol/L; MVZ Labor Prof. Seelig, Karlsruhe, Germany: upper limit
of normal value <40pmol/L). Aza, Azathioprine; CMAP, Compound muscle action potential; 3,4 DMP, 3,4-diaminopyridine; IVIG, Intravenous
immunoglobulins; Pred, Prednisolone; VGCC, Voltage-gated calcium channel.

Introduction
Lambert-Eaton myasthenic syndrome (LEMS) is a rare
autoimmune disorder of neuromuscular transmission due
to the presence of antibodies to presynaptic P/Q-type
voltage-gated calcium channels (VGCC-Ab). It is charac-
terized by increased fatigability, fluctuating limb girdle
weakness and autonomic changes [1]. Repetitive nerve
stimulation (RNS), the main diagnostic test for LEMS, is
characterized by (1) an incremental response ≥100%
after brief exercise, (2) a decremental response at low
rates of stimulation and (3) a low compound muscle action
potential (CMAP) amplitude at rest [1]. Symptomatic
therapy formerly consisted of a lifelong potassium
channel blocker—3,4-diaminopyridine (3,4-DAP) (the
gold standard)—and (facultatively) immunosuppressive
drugs [2]. To the best of our knowledge, no clinical reports
have been published to date about long-term follow-up
outcomes in patients who discontinued 3,4-DAP therapy.
In addition, we know of no recent articles in which the nat-
ural history of patients with autoimmune-mediated LEMS
has been addressed.

In this report, we present the long-term follow-up of two
patients with autoimmune-mediated LEMS, one of whom
took no 3,4-DAP (patient 1) for part of the follow-up
period and the other of whom took low-dose 3,4-DAP
irregularly (patient 2) for some of the follow-up period.
Follow-up by pulmonary function testing, bronchos-
copy and magnetic resonance imaging of the lung and
mediastinum for more than 5 years did not show evi-
dence of small cell lung cancer or thymoma, and the
SOX1 Ab titer was normal in both.

Case presentation
Patient 1
At the time of his initial diagnosis at age 15 years, a Cau-
casian boy (patient 1) presented with symptoms of fluctu-
ating muscle weakness and easy fatigability (Figure 1A).
His neurological examination revealed mild proximal
paresis. His physical status stabilized after treatment
with 3,4-DAP was initiated (initial dose of 20mg/day,
maintenance dose of 40mg/day to 50mg/day). Five and
one-half years later, however, the patient wished to discon-
tinue the treatment. After that point, his electrophysiological

parameters (which had not normalized with 3,4-DAP
therapy) and VGCC-Ab titer remained stable. At the
time of his final examination 15 years after diagnosis,
he reported exertion-induced complaints (for example,
climbing stairs, lifting weight >15kg) and muscle pain
lasting several days after unusual physical activities. He
did not feel restricted in his occupation as a technical
laboratory assistant. He had no permanent paresis, no
vegetative nerve involvement and no cerebellar ataxia.
His Quantitative Myasthenia Gravis (QMG) Test scores
were normal.

Patient 2
At the time of diagnosis, a 32-year-old Caucasian man
(patient 2) presented with symptoms of fluctuating muscle
weakness and easy fatigability (Figure 1B). His physical
examination showed a limb girdle syndrome predominantly
in the hip girdle. Treatment with prednisolone (40mg/day,
stepwise tapering) and azathioprine (150mg/day) was initi-
ated shortly after the diagnosis. This therapy was discontin-
ued after 12 months due to lack of response. 3,4-DAP was
then started and increased to a dose of 4×20mg/day. The
patient took the drug irregularly (≤1×20mg/day), however,
owing to its very short-lasting effect (<1 hour). During the
14-year period of observation, his RNS responses and
VGCC-Ab titer remained stable; his CMAP amplitudes
were decreasing; and his clinical symptoms did not deteri-
orate. At his last follow-up examination, the patient was in-
dependent in all of his daily activities. He walked with
crutches (maximal walking distance, 200m) and used a stair
lift (for 6 years prior to the last follow-up). He reported ex-
ertion dyspnea, dry mouth and dry eyes, but no cerebellar
ataxia. His QMG Test score was 10. His physical examin-
ation revealed proximal paresis (shoulder girdle, Medical
Research Council (MRC) grade 4/5; hip girdle, MRC grade
2–3/5), but no atrophies.

Discussion
In the two patients reported here, the signs and symp-
toms of LEMS and its functional impact on daily activ-
ities seemed to be quite stable over time and did not
deteriorate. Symptomatic treatment seemed to stabilize
the disease initially, but it had no sustained effect. In the

Schneider et al. Journal of Medical Case Reports  (2015) 9:59 

Page 4 of 4

long term, reported outcomes for patients with non-
cancer-associated LEMS who were on immunosuppres-
sive therapy for a median of 6 years were that 35% had
normalized resting CMAP amplitudes, 58% had incre-
ments within the normal range and 52% had decreased
VGCC-Ab titers [3].

Conclusions
The benefit of each long-term therapy for patients with
LEMS should be critically assessed during follow-up,
and possible side effects should be balanced against the
quality of life.

Consent
Written informed consent was obtained from the pa-
tients for publication of this case report and any accom-
panying images. A copy of the written consent is available
for review by the Editor-in-Chief of this journal.

Abbreviations
Ab: Antibody; CMAP: Compound muscle action potential;
3,4-DAP: 3,4-diaminopyridine; LEMS: Lambert-Eaton myasthenic
syndrome; QMG test: Quantitative Myasthenia Gravis Test;
VGCC: Voltage-gated calcium channel.

Competing interests
FH is a member of the Lambert Eaton Myasthenic Syndrome (LEMS) Registry
Publication Board and received travel fees and lecturer honoraria from
BioMarin Pharmaceutical. IS and MK declare that they have no competing
interests.

Authors’ contributions
IS made substantial contributions to analysis and interpretation of data,
played a major part in revising the manuscript and prepared the figures. MK
made substantial contributions to the acquisition and interpretation of data
(repetitive stimulation). FH recruited the patients; made substantial
contributions to the study’s conception and the acquisition, analysis and
interpretation of data; and played a major part in drafting the manuscript.
All authors were involved in drafting and revising the manuscript, and all
authors read and approved the final manuscript.

Acknowledgments
The authors thank Prof. A Vincent (John Radcliffe Hospital, Oxford, UK) and
Prof. HP Seelig (MVZ Labor Prof. Seelig, Karlsruhe, Germany) for laboratory
analysis and Dr. K Birch for copyediting the manuscript.

Received: 6 September 2014 Accepted: 13 January 2015

References
1.

AAEM Quality Assurance Committee. Practice parameter for repetitive nerve
stimulation and single fiber EMG evaluation of adults with suspected
myasthenia gravis or Lambert–Eaton myasthenic syndrome: summary
statement. Muscle Nerve. 2001;24:1236–8.
Skeie GO, Apostolski S, Evoli A, Gilhus NE, Illa I, Harms L, et al. Guidelines for
treatment of autoimmune neuromuscular transmission disorders. Eur J Neurol.
2010;17:893–902.

2.

3. Maddison P, Lang B, Mills K, Newsom-Davies J. Long-term outcome in
Lambert-Eaton myasthenic syndrome without lung cancer. J Neurol
Neurosurg Psychiatry. 2001;70:212–7.

Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central
and take full advantage of: 

• Convenient online submission

• Thorough peer review

• No space constraints or color ﬁgure charges

• Immediate publication on acceptance

• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar

• Research which is freely available for redistribution

Submit your manuscript at 
www.biomedcentral.com/submit

