Best et al. Journal of Medical Case Reports  (2015) 9:73 
DOI 10.1186/s13256-015-0520-0

JOURNAL OF MEDICAL
CASE REPORTS

CA SE R EP O R T
Ketamine and transcranial magnetic stimulation
treatment for bipolar II disorder: a case report
Steven RD Best1*, Brian P Griffin2 and Dan G Pavel3

Open Access

Abstract

Introduction: To the best of our knowledge, this is the first case report of successful treatment for bipolar II
disorder using a combined ketamine and transcranial magnetic stimulation treatment.
Case presentation: A 43-year-old Caucasian unemployed man presented to us with treatment-resistant bipolar II
disorder, currently in a mixed state. A psychometric assessment and brain single-photon emission computer tomography
scan were conducted at baseline. His psychometric assessment revealed severe depressive and manic symptoms that
were consistent with bipolar II disorder. Findings from a brain single-photon emission computer tomography scan
converged with those from his psychometric assessment. The combined ketamine and transcranial magnetic
stimulation treatment was administered a total of 24 times over five months, with his ketamine dosage increased
from 50mg at the first treatment to 600mg by the last. Starting after the second treatment, he reported substantial
improvements in his symptoms. A follow-up psychometric assessment and brain single-photon emission computer
tomography scan five months later revealed substantial blood flow increases in the previously deficient areas.
Conclusions: We provide preliminary evidence for a treatment method that magnifies the therapeutic benefits of
infused ketamine along with transcranial magnetic stimulation. We postulate that this may be based on an interaction
at the level of the relevant cortico-thalamo-cortical circuit(s).
Keywords: Ketamine, Transcranial magnetic stimulation, TMS, Bipolar II

Introduction
intravenous ketamine, an N-
Evidence indicates that
is effective in reducing
methyl-D-aspartate antagonist,
depressive symptoms, including those associated with bi-
polar depression [1-3]. By offering rapid relief that takes
effect within two hours, ketamine provides an important
benefit over typical antidepressant medications [4]. In a
separate body of work, there is evidence that transcranial
magnetic stimulation (TMS), a noninvasive technique
for stimulation of the brain, can induce antidepressant
and anti-manic effects. A small study suggested that the
administration of ketamine prior to TMS might interfere
with treatment efficacy [5]. However, another study found
that abnormal
function in a frontal cortico-thalamo-
cortical circuit was a decisive factor in treatment resist-
ance [6]. It was hypothesized that a way to improve the
likelihood of response to ketamine infusion would be to

* Correspondence: srdbest@neuroscience.md
1The Neuroscience Center, 440 Lake Cook Road, Building 2, Deerfield, IL
60015, USA
Full list of author information is available at the end of the article

modulate the relevant circuit during the infusion, through
TMS of the medial prefrontal area that overlays the anter-
ior cingulate cortex. It was postulated that an improve-
ment in symptoms would occur when the combined effect
entrained the electrophysiologic abnormality (abnormally
slow and relatively non-responsive brain rhythms) and re-
stored this network to a more responsive state [7,8].

Case presentation
A 43-year-old Caucasian unemployed man presented
with lifelong symptoms of depression, anxiety, and im-
pulsive behavior. He reported struggling with intense de-
pressed mood, substantial life stress including a divorce
in progress, and the inability to hold a job due to the im-
pairment and distress associated with his symptoms. He
had received psychopharmacological and psychothera-
peutic treatment for the previous six years, but reported
that he had not experienced any clinically meaningful
gains as a result of those treatments. His medication

© 2015 Best et al.; licensee BioMed Central. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and
reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly credited. The Creative Commons Public Domain
Dedication waiver (http://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/) applies to the data made available in this article,
unless otherwise stated.

Best et al. Journal of Medical Case Reports  (2015) 9:73 

Page 2 of 4

acid,

ezogabine,

oxcarbazepine,

history included fluoxetine, sertraline, paroxetine, escita-
levetiracetam, val-
lopram, desvenlafaxine, duloxetine,
proic
aripiprazole,
quetiapine fumarate, chlorpromazine, mesoridazine, and
lithium. At his initial assessment, his medications in-
cluded sertraline, valproic acid, and lisdexamfetamine
dimesylate (this medication was not approved by our
team, but rather was prescribed by his previous phys-
ician who believed his diagnosis to be attention deficit
hyperactivity disorder). On the Thase and Rush Staging
Model, he was at Stage III of treatment resistance, indi-
cating failure of more than two adequate trials of distinct
classes of antidepressants, as well as failure of an ad-
equate trial with a tricyclic antidepressant.

He was given a primary diagnosis of bipolar II dis-
order, currently in a mixed state, based on a psychomet-
ric assessment conducted by an independent licensed
clinical psychologist prior to the beginning of treatment.
His assessment included the administration of a valid
Personality Assessment Inventory (PAI) and the Beck
Depression Inventory (BDI)-II. These measures showed
severe depressive (PAI Depression (DEP) T score=79,
BDI-II=36) and manic (PAI Mania (MAN) T score=74,
PAI Aggression (AGG) T score=72) symptoms. Eleva-
tions in his life stress were also apparent (PAI Stress
(STR) T score=86).

He was also assessed at baseline using brain single-
photon emission computer tomography (SPECT) with
99mTechnetium-hexamethylpropyleneamineoxime (HM
PAO). SPECT is a neuroimaging technique that shows
the functional status of gray mater areas via the meas-
urement of relative perfusion [9-12]. Results from this
assessment revealed significant relative underperfusion
bilaterally in multiple hemispheric areas, more accentu-
ated in his frontal lobes, anterior cingulate and extensive
underperfusion in his orbitofrontal and apico-mesial
temporal areas. Marked hyperperfusion was seen in his
right caudate head, cerebellar vermis, and retro-splenial
posterior cingulate. Moderate hyperperfusion was appar-
ent in his left caudate head, dorsal aspect of his posterior
cingulate, and in an asymmetric thalamus. This combin-
ation of underperfused areas is compatible with multiple
dysfunctions related to attention, memory, executive
function, impulse control, and social interaction, while
the hyperperfused areas are often found in anxiety and
depression [13,14].

After informing him of the possible risks and benefits
of the combined ketamine and TMS treatment, the new
technique was used to treat his bipolar II disorder. He
was first given two days of TMS pretreatment, which
consisted of four treatments of 30 minutes each day,
with 45-minute resting intervals between each treat-
ment. Based on 14 years of observational evidence from
our clinic, the TMS consisted of 40 minutes of 1 hertz

continuous TMS administered at 115% of the motor
threshold. The combined protocol treatment added the
intravenous ketamine infusion (Ketalar®, manufactured by
Par Sterile Products LLC, Parsippany, NJ, USA), which
was administered concurrent to, and bracketed within, the
middle 30 minutes of TMS; there were five minutes of
TMS pre- and post-infusion. The TMS head coil (manu-
factured by Neotonus, Inc., Marietta, GA, USA) was posi-
tioned at the midline of his scalp to maximally stimulate
the medial prefrontal area that overlays the anterior cingu-
late region. This area was targeted based on evidence that
it is implicated in depression [15].

The protocol described above was repeated a total of 24
times over five months, at approximately one-week inter-
vals. All stimulation levels were within published safety
guidelines, and a certified registered nurse anesthetist per-
sonally managed the anesthesia aspects of this treatment at
all times. The dosage of infused ketamine was gradually in-
creased from 50mg at the first treatment (approximately
0.5mg/kg) to 600mg by the last treatment. The dose in-
creases were based on his tolerance to higher doses and to
symptom reduction, as well as on the clinical evaluation
that was performed a few days after each treatment. The
ketamine dose adjustment was previously described [16].
Institutional review board exemption was obtained for this
report from an independent accredited agency (Sterling
IRB) because the ketamine dose adjustment used in our
current study has been previously described and approved.
Beginning after the second combined treatment, he re-
ported substantial improvements in his symptoms and
related functioning, eventually including the ability to
maintain a full-time job. Five and a half months after his
initial assessment, he again underwent a psychometric
assessment. Results from a valid PAI and BDI-II showed
substantial decreases in his symptoms related to both
depression (PAI DEP T score=65, BDI-II=13) and mania
(PAI MAN T score=61, PAI AGG T score=56). Remark-
ably, these improvements occurred even though he contin-
ued to experience elevated life stress over the duration of
the treatment (PAI STR T score=82). Moreover, his follow-
up brain SPECT scan showed increased relative perfusion
in all previously underperfused areas (see Figure 1), thus
documenting a specific functional substrate for the treat-
ment effect.

Conclusions
To the best of our knowledge, this is the first report of a
successful treatment for bipolar II disorder using com-
bined ketamine and TMS. Our patient reported ever-
increased cognitive ability (including improved executive
function) and improved affective regulation, which per-
sisted even after the active treatment phase ended. In
the future, a randomized controlled trial should be
conducted to examine the efficacy of this combined

Best et al. Journal of Medical Case Reports  (2015) 9:73 

Page 3 of 4

Figure 1 Representative images from the various types of displays used in our protocol. The first three images are part of the orthogonal
displays and the last three are part of the stereotactic surface projections obtained with the Neurostat software (manufactured by Neurostat/
3D-SSP, University of Washington, Seattle, WA, USA) [9]. Upper row: Baseline brain single-photon emission computer tomography (SPECT) shows
multiple areas of hemispheric underperfusion, more accentuated in his frontal lobes, orbitofrontal areas and apico-mesial temporal areas. Marked
hyperperfusion in his right putamen and in parts of his posterior cingulate and right cerebellum is also visible. Lower row: Follow-up SPECT scan
at five and a half months post-treatment shows that practically all previously underperfused areas have significantly improved relative perfusion.
Previously hyperperfused areas are either unchanged or increasingly hyperperfused.

treatment for the acute emotional and chronic cognitive
consequences of bipolar disorders. Future work needs to
further elucidate the possible mechanisms underlying
combined ketamine and TMS treatment.

Consent
Written informed consent was obtained from the patient
for publication of this case report and accompanying
images. A copy of the written consent is available for
review by the Editor-in-Chief of this journal.

Abbreviations
AGG: Aggression; BDI-II: Beck Depression Inventory-II; DEP: Depression;
MAN: Mania; PAI: Personality Assessment Inventory; SPECT: Single-photon
emission computer tomography; STR: Stress; TMS: Transcranial magnetic
stimulation.

Competing interests
The authors declare that they have no competing interests.

Authors’ contributions
SRDB provided the combined ketamine and TMS treatment, as well as
integrated the psychiatric and SPECT data. BPG conducted the pre- and
post-treatment psychometric assessments, as well as analyzed and interpreted
the psychometric data. DGP performed the SPECT, as well as analyzed and
interpreted the SPECT data. All authors read and approved the final manuscript.

Author details
1The Neuroscience Center, 440 Lake Cook Road, Building 2, Deerfield, IL
60015, USA. 2Independent Practice, 333 East Ontario Suite 1203B, Chicago, IL,
USA. 3PathFinder Brain SPECT, 440 Lake Cook Road, Suite 3, Deerfield, IL
60015, USA.

Received: 16 August 2014 Accepted: 8 January 2015

References
1.

2.

3.

Ghasemi M, Phillips C, Trillo L, De Miguel Z, Das D, Salehi A. The role of
NMDA receptors in the pathophysiology and treatment of mood disorders.
Neurosci Biobehav Rev. 2014;47:336–58.
Naughton M, Clark G, O’Leary OF, Cryan JF, Dinan TG. A review of ketamine
in affective disorders: current evidence of clinical efficacy, limitations of use
and pre-clinical evidence on proposed mechanisms of action. J Affect
Disord. 2014;156:24–35.
Zarate CA, Brutsche NE, Ibrahim L, Franco-Chaves J, Diazgranados N,
Cravchik A, et al. Replication of ketamine’s antidepressant efficacy in bipolar
depression: a randomized controlled add-on trial. Biol Psychiatry.
2012;71:939–46.

4. Murrough JW, Perez AM, Pillemer S, Stern J, Parides MK, Aan HR, et al. Rapid

and longer-term antidepressant effects of repeated ketamine infusions in
treatment-resistant major depression. Biol Psychiatry. 2012;74:250–6.
Lazzaro VD, Oliviero A, Profice P, Pennisi MA, Pilato F, Zito G, et al. Ketamine
increases human motor cortex excitability to transcranial magnetic
stimulation. J Physiology. 2003;547:485–96.
Llinas RR, Ribary U, Jeanmonod D, Kronberg E, Mitras PP. Thalamocortical
dysrhythmia: a neurological and neuropsychiatric syndrome characterized
by magnetoencephalography. Proc Natl Acad Sci. 1999;96:15222–7.
Thut G, Veniero D, Romei V, Miniussi C, Schyns P, Gross J. Rhythmic TMS
causes local entrainment of natural oscillatory signatures. Curr Biol.
2011;21:1176–85.
Johnson JS, Hamidi M, Postle BR. Using EEG to explore how rTMS produces
its effects on behavior. Brain Topogr. 2010;22:281–93.
Catafau AM. Brain SPECT in clinical practice. Part I: perfusion. J Nucl Med.
2001;42:259–71.

5.

6.

7.

8.

9.

10. Holman BL, Devous MD. Functional brain SPECT: the emergence of a

powerful clinical method. J Nucl Med. 1992;33:1888–904.

11. Minoshima S, Koepe RA, Frey KA, Kuhl DE. Anatomical standardization: linear

12.

scaling and nonlinear warping of functional brain images. J Nucl Med.
1994;35:1528–37.
Juni JE, Waxman AD, Devous MD, Tikofsky RS, Ichise M, Van Heertum RL,
et al. Procedure guidelines for brain perfusion SPECT using 99mTc
radiopharmaceuticals 3.0. J Nucl Med Technol. 2009;37:191–5.

13. Pliszka SR, Glahn DC, Semrud-Clikeman M, Franklin C, Perez R, Xiong J, et al.

Neuroimaging of inhibitory control areas in children with attention deficit

Best et al. Journal of Medical Case Reports  (2015) 9:73 

Page 4 of 4

14.

hyperactivity disorder who were treatment naïve or in long-term treatment.
Am J Psychiatry. 2006;163:1052–60.
Sheehan W, Thurber S. Review of two years of experiences with SPECT
among psychiatric patients in a rural hospital setting. J Psychiatr Pract.
2008;14:318–23.

15. Mayberg HS, Lozano AM, Voon V, McNeely HE, Seminowicz D, Hamani C,
et al. Deep brain stimulation for treatment-resistant depression. Neuron.
2005;45:651–60.

16. Best S. Rapid relief of treatment resistant depression by facilitated ketamine

infusion: a preliminary report. Activ Nerv Super. 2014;56:28–36.

Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central
and take full advantage of: 

• Convenient online submission

• Thorough peer review

• No space constraints or color ﬁgure charges

• Immediate publication on acceptance

• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar

• Research which is freely available for redistribution

Submit your manuscript at 
www.biomedcentral.com/submit

