Nozaki et al. Journal of Medical Case Reports  (2015) 9:67 
DOI 10.1186/s13256-015-0538-3

JOURNAL OF MEDICAL
CASE REPORTS

CA SE R EP O R T
Open Access
Aspiration pneumonia and bronchopneumonia in
progressive supranuclear palsy treated with qing
fei tang: two case reports
Ichiro Nozaki1,2*, Yuko Kato-Motozaki2, Tokuhei Ikeda2, Kazuya Takahashi2, Atsuro Tagami3, Chiho Ishida2
and Kiyonobu Komai2

Abstract

Introduction: Qing fei tang, which is used for various respiratory diseases, is useful for reducing relapse of aspiration
pneumonia and bronchopneumonia in stroke, but the effect remains unknown in Parkinson's syndrome. We report
two cases of Japanese patients with progressive supranuclear palsy and relapsing aspiration pneumonia and
bronchopneumonia, which was successfully prevented by qing fei tang.
Case presentation: Two Japanese men with progressive supranuclear palsy and receiving total enteral feeding
(patient one (66-years-old) and patient two (76-years-old)) had experienced recurrent aspiration pneumonia and
bronchopneumonia, which was unresponsive to conventional therapy. The respiratory infection developed twice at
intervals of two months in patient one, and nine times at almost monthly intervals in patient two. Thereafter, they
were given qing fei tang. After administration of qing fei tang, the respiratory infection reoccurred only once; after
5.5 months for patient one, and six months for patient two. Both of our patients clearly showed a reduced
incidence of respiratory infection.
Conclusions: Both of our patients clearly showed a reduced incidence of respiratory infection after the
administration of qing fei tang. Qing fei tang could be useful for the prevention of recurrent aspiration pneumonia
and bronchopneumonia in progressive supranuclear palsy.
Keywords: Aspiration pneumonia and bronchopneumonia, Qing fei tang, Parkinson’s syndrome, Progressive
supranuclear palsy

Introduction
Aspiration pneumonia and bronchopneumonia frequently
occur in patients with Parkinson’s syndrome in their later
stage, mainly by dysphagia. The prevention of relapsing
aspiration pneumonia and bronchopneumonia is unsatis-
factory in Parkinson’s syndrome.

Qing fei tang, which is a Chinese traditional medical
mixture called seihai-to in Japan, has been used for the
treatment of productive cough, acute and chronic bron-
chitis, bronchiectasis, pharyngitis, bronchial asthma, and
pneumonia. A main component of qing fei
tang is

* Correspondence: ichi51@med.kanazawa-u.ac.jp
1Faculty of Medicine, Institute of Medical, Pharmaceutical and Health
Sciences, Kanazawa University, 13-1, Takara-machi, Kanazawa 920-8640, Japan
2Department of Neurology, National Hospital Organization Iou Hospital,
Ni-73-1, Iwade-machi, Kanazawa 920-0192, Japan
Full list of author information is available at the end of the article

powdered extract composed of the following 16 herbs:
Angelicae Radix, Ophiopogonis Tuber, Hoelen, Scutellariae
Radix, Platycodi Radix, Armeniacae Semen, Gardeniae
Fructus, Mori Cortex, Zizyphi Fructus, Aurantii Nobilis
Pericarpium, Caulis Bambusae in Taeniis, Asparagi Radix,
Fritillariae Bulbus, Glycyrrhizae Radix, Schisandrae Fructus,
and Zingiberis Siccatum Rhizoma [1]. It is reported that
qing fei tang is effective for reducing the relapse rate of
aspiration pneumonia and bronchopneumonia in patients
with stroke or recurrent laryngeal nerve palsy [1]. To the
best of our knowledge, there have been no reported cases
of Parkinson’s syndrome with recurrent aspiration pneu-
monia successfully treated by qing fei tang.

In progressive supranuclear palsy (PSP), aspiration
pneumonia and bronchopneumonia frequently occurs,
and often is refractory. We considered whether qing fei

© 2015 Nozaki et al.; licensee BioMed Central. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and
reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly credited. The Creative Commons Public Domain
Dedication waiver (http://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/) applies to the data made available in this article,
unless otherwise stated.

Nozaki et al. Journal of Medical Case Reports  (2015) 9:67 

Page 2 of 4

tang would be effective for the prevention of relapsing
aspiration pneumonia and bronchopneumonia in PSP as
well as stroke. If so, then qing fei tang could be a new
treatment for recurrent and refractory respiratory infec-
tion in PSP.

We present two cases of Japanese patients with PSP and
relapsing aspiration pneumonia and bronchopneumonia
despite receiving total enteral feeding and conventional
medication. We describe the successful treatment of their
recurrent respiratory infections by qing fei tang.

Case presentation
Patient one
A 63-year-old Japanese man presented with speech dif-
ficulty, standing instability, drinking difficulty, and slow
movement at first. At 12 months after his initial presen-
tation, his neurological examination revealed cognitive
decline, masked face, vertical oculomotor disturbance,
dysarthria, bradykinesia, trunk-dominant muscular ri-
gidity, and a tendency to fall. Magnetic resonance im-
aging of his head showed mild atrophy of the midbrain
tegmentum. Probable PSP was diagnosed according to
the National Institute of Neurological Disorders and
Stroke and the Society for PSP (NINDS-SPSP) diagnos-
tic criteria [2]. At 10 months after the diagnosis, he was
confined to a wheelchair, and aspiration pneumonia
occurred three times at monthly intervals. Although a
percutaneous endoscopic gastrostomy (PEG) was per-
formed immediately after his last pneumonia, pneumo-
nia reoccurred twice at 18 and 20 months after his PEG
regardless of treatment with clarithromycin and aman-
tadine (Figure 1). A daily dose of 9g of qing fei tang
(Tsumura & Co., Tokyo, Japan) was started, and aspir-
ation pneumonia reoccurred only once, at 5.5 months
after the start of treatment (Figure 1). The bacteria in
his sputum were the same as before starting qing fei
tang (Pseudomonas aeruginosa and methicillin-resistant

Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA)), except for Streptococcus
agalactiae.

Patient two
A 74-year-old Japanese man presented to us with a
three-year history of difficulty in moving his upper
limbs, a tendency to fall, and slow movements. His
neurological examination revealed supranuclear vertical
gaze palsy, dysarthria, bradykinesia, muscular rigidity,
and loss of postural reflex. Magnetic resonance imaging
of his head demonstrated severe atrophy of his midbrain
tegmentum. These clinical manifestations led to a diagno-
sis of probable PSP according to NINDS-SPSP criteria [2].
A PEG was performed in a bedridden condition because
of progressive dysphagia 23 months after the diagnosis,
but then aspiration pneumonia and bronchopneumonia
developed nine times during 10 months, at intervals of
about one month, with medication including ambroxol,
L-carbocysteine, clarithromycin, bromhexine, and aman-
tadine (Figure 2). Qing fei tang was given daily at a dose of
9g, and then aspiration pneumonia occurred only once,
six months after starting the treatment (Figure 2). The
types of bacteria in his sputum did not change compared
with before starting qing fei tang (P. aeruginosa, MRSA
and Klebsiella pneumoniae).

Discussion
We present two cases of Japanese patients with PSP who
experienced recurrent aspiration pneumonia and bron-
chopneumonia regardless of receipt of total enteral feed-
ing and conventional therapy. Patient one experienced
recurrence twice at intervals of two months and patient
two experienced recurrence nine times at almost monthly
intervals. The respiratory infection developed only once,
at 5.5 months (patient one) and six months (patient two)
after the administration of qing fei tang.

Figure 1 The clinical course of patient one. The incidence of aspiration pneumonia and bronchopneumonia, which are shown by black triangles
was exhibited before and after administration of qing fei tang at X month in patient one.

Nozaki et al. Journal of Medical Case Reports  (2015) 9:67 

Page 3 of 4

Figure 2 The clinical course of patient two. The incidence of aspiration pneumonia and bronchopneumonia, which are shown by black triangles
was shown before and after the administration of qing fei tang at X month in patient two.

After administration of qing fei tang, the incidence of
aspiration pneumonia and bronchopneumonia fell in both
of our patients, and the interval until onset of respiratory
infection was prolonged. No adverse effects induced by
qing fei tang were found in either of our patients.

Aspiration pneumonia and bronchopneumonia is the
leading cause of death in patients with Parkinson’s syn-
drome,
including dementia with diffuse Lewy bodies,
corticobasal degeneration, PSP, and multiple system at-
rophy [3]. Onset of dysphagia deteriorates the prognosis
of Parkinson’s syndrome [3], and may cause subsequent
silent aspiration [4]. Good control of recurrent aspir-
ation pneumonia and bronchopneumonia is important
to improve the prognosis in Parkinson’s syndrome. To
date, conventional treatment including clarithromycin
and amantadine has been unsatisfactory. Furthermore,
total enteral feeding is not completely safe because aspir-
ation pneumonia can develop due to silent aspiration,
even if patients do not feed orally. In our patient one, al-
though no aspiration pneumonia occurred after PEG for
a while, afterwards respiratory infection reoccurred twice
in a relatively short period. It has been reported that
qing fei tang was effective for relapsing aspiration pneu-
monia in seven patients with stroke treated with qing fei
tang including four patients without oral intake, com-
pared with eight patients with stroke treated with con-
ventional therapy including six patients without oral
intake [1]. Both of our patients were without oral intake,
and we also found that qing fei tang could reduce relapse
of aspiration pneumonia and bronchopneumonia.

The preventive effects of qing fei tang against aspiration
pneumonia are considered to occur by a mechanism other
than the improvement of dysphagia, because the swallow-
ing reflex could not be improved by qing fei tang [1]. In a
previous report, xanthine oxidase activity was elevated in

the lung tissues of aspiration pneumonia-model mice, but
the activation was markedly inhibited by qing fei tang [5].
Pretreatment with qing fei tang is considered to reduce
oxygen radicals produced by inflammation in the lungs,
and to reduce the mortality rate of mice with aspiration
pneumonia [5]. In our two patients, while qing fei tang
could inhibit the respiratory infection effectively, the types
of bacteria detected in their sputum were almost the same
both before and after administration of qing fei tang. The
effects of qing fei tang could not be explained by the
change in the types of bacteria, but could partially be
explained by the above-mentioned defense mechanism,
namely, the reduction of oxygen radicals.

In our case series, it was a new finding that adminis-
tration of qing fei tang could lead to a reduction in the
incidence of aspiration pneumonia and bronchopneumo-
nia, and prolong the interval until the onset of respiratory
infection in PSP. Qing fei tang may be a safe available op-
tion for preventive therapy of recurrent aspiration pneu-
monia and bronchopneumonia by a different mechanism
from conventional medication. The reduction of respira-
tory infection may prolong the survival time in PSP. Qing
fei tang should be considered when aspiration pneumonia
cannot be kept under control in patients with PSP using
conventional therapy and total enteral feeding. Further
large-scale, ideally mechanistic, studies may better clarify
whether qing fei tang can reduce the relapse rate of
aspiration pneumonia in patients with PSP, compared to
a control.

Conclusions
We report two cases of patients with PSP and recurrent
aspiration pneumonia and bronchopneumonia, the latter
of which was successfully treated by qing fei tang. Qing
fei tang could prevent recurrent aspiration pneumonia

Nozaki et al. Journal of Medical Case Reports  (2015) 9:67 

Page 4 of 4

and bronchopneumonia in patients with PSP, and may
be an option for treatment in addition to conventional
therapy.

Consent
Written informed consent was obtained from the pa-
tients for publication of this case series. The copies of
the written consent are available for review by the
Editor-in-Chief of this journal.

Abbreviations
MRSA: Methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus; NINDS-SPSP: National Institute
of Neurological Disorders and the Society for PSP diagnostic criteria;
PEG: Percutaneous endoscopic gastrostomy; PSP: Progressive supranuclear palsy.

Competing interests
The authors declare that they have no competing interests.

Authors’ contributions
IN collected the clinical data and drafted the manuscript. YKM, TI, KT, AT, CI,
and KK were involved in critically revising the manuscript for important
intellectual content. All authors read and approved the final manuscript.

Acknowledgements
The authors would like to thank Dr Yoshihisa Ikeda from National Hospital
Organization Iou Hospital for providing assistance with the clinical care of
our patients.

Author details
1Faculty of Medicine, Institute of Medical, Pharmaceutical and Health
Sciences, Kanazawa University, 13-1, Takara-machi, Kanazawa 920-8640, Japan.
2Department of Neurology, National Hospital Organization Iou Hospital,
Ni-73-1, Iwade-machi, Kanazawa 920-0192, Japan. 3Department of Internal
Medicine, National Hospital Organization Iou Hospital, Ni-73-1, Iwade-machi,
Kanazawa 920-0192, Japan.

Received: 9 December 2014 Accepted: 29 January 2015

References
1. Mantani N, Kasahara Y, Kamata T, Sekiya N, Shimada Y, Usuda K. Effect of

2.

Seihai-to, a Kampo medicine, in relapsing aspiration pneumonia-an open-label
pilot study. Phytomedicine. 2002;9:195–201.
Litvan I, Agid Y, Calne D, Campbell G, Dubois B, Duvoisin RC, et al. Clinical
research criteria for the diagnosis of progressive supranuclear palsy (Steele-
Richardson-Olszewski syndrome): report of the NINDS-SPSP international
workshop. Neurology. 1996;47:1–9.

3. Müller J, Wenning GK, Verny M, McKee A, Chaudhuri KR, Jellinger K, et al.

4.

5.

Progression of dysarthria and dysphagia in postmortem-confirmed parkinsonian
disorders. Arch Neurol. 2001;58:259–64.
Litvan I, Sastry N, Sonies BC. Characterizing swallowing abnormalities in
progressive supranuclear palsy. Neurology. 1997;48:1654–62.
Iwasaki K, Wang Q, Satoh N, Yoshida S, Akaike T, Sekizawa K, et al. Effects of
qing fei tang (TJ-90) on aspiration pneumonia in mice. Phytomedicine.
1999;6:95–101.

Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central
and take full advantage of: 

• Convenient online submission

• Thorough peer review

• No space constraints or color ﬁgure charges

• Immediate publication on acceptance

• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar

• Research which is freely available for redistribution

Submit your manuscript at 
www.biomedcentral.com/submit

