Chotivichit et al. Journal of Medical Case Reports  (2015) 9:79 
DOI 10.1186/s13256-015-0535-6

JOURNAL OF MEDICAL
CASE REPORTS

Open Access

CA SE R EP O R T
Chronic spinal cord injury treated with
transplanted autologous bone marrow-derived
mesenchymal stem cells tracked by magnetic
resonance imaging: a case report
Areesak Chotivichit1*, Monchai Ruangchainikom1, Pipat Chiewvit2, Adisak Wongkajornsilp3
and Kittipong Sujirattanawimol4

Abstract

Introduction: Intrathecal transplantation is a minimally invasive method for the delivery of stem cells, however,
whether the cells migrate from the lumbar to the injured cervical spinal cord has not been proved in humans. We
describe an attempt to track bone marrow-derived mesenchymal stem cells in a patient with a chronic cervical
spinal cord injury.
Case presentation: A 33-year-old Thai man who sustained an incomplete spinal cord injury from the atlanto-axial
subluxation was enrolled into a pilot study aiming to track bone marrow-derived mesenchymal stem cells, labeled
with superparamagnetic iron oxide nanoparticles, from intrathecal transplantation in chronic cervical spinal
cord injury. He had been dependent on respiratory support since 2005. There had been no improvement in his
neurological function for the past 54 months. Bone marrow-derived mesenchymal stem cells were retrieved
from his iliac crest and repopulated to the target number. One half of the total cells were labeled with superparamagnetic
iron oxide nanoparticles before transplantation to the intrathecal space between L4 and L5. Magnetic resonance imaging
studies were performed immediately after the transplantation and at 48 hours, two weeks, one month and seven months
after the transplantation. His magnetic resonance imaging scan performed immediately after the transplantation showed
hyposignal intensity of paramagnetic substance tagged stem cells in the subarachnoid space at the lumbar spine area.
This phenomenon was observed at the surface around his cervical spinal cord at 48 hours. A focal hyposignal intensity of
tagged bone marrow-derived stem cells was detected at his cervical spinal cord with magnetic resonance imaging at 48
hours, which faded after two weeks, and then disappeared after one month. No clinical improvement of the neurological
function had occurred at the end of this study. However, at 48 hours after the transplantation, he presented with a fever,
headache, myalgia and worsening of his motor function (by one grade of all key muscles by the American Spinal Injury
Association impairment scale), which lasted for 48 hours.
Conclusion: Intrathecal injection of bone marrow-derived stem cells at the lumbar spine level could deliver the cells to
the injured cervical spinal cord. Transient complications should be observed closely in the first 48 hours after transplantation.
Further study should be carried out to evaluate the result of the treatment.
Keywords: Spinal cord injury, Mesenchymal stem cells, Superparamagnetic iron oxide, Magnetic resonance imaging,
Tracking

* Correspondence: areesak.cho@mahidol.ac.th
1Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Faculty of Medicine Siriraj Hospital,
Mahidol University, 2 Prannok Rd, Bangkoknoi, Bangkok 10700, Thailand
Full list of author information is available at the end of the article

© 2015 Chotivichit et al.; licensee BioMed Central. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and
reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly credited. The Creative Commons Public Domain
Dedication waiver (http://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/) applies to the data made available in this article,
unless otherwise stated.

Chotivichit et al. Journal of Medical Case Reports  (2015) 9:79 

Page 2 of 7

Introduction
Spinal cord injury usually results in long-lasting disabil-
ity as there are limited treatments for improving neuro-
logical condition. Finding a new specific treatment to
treat such injury is a major clinical challenge, however,
stem cell transplantation is a possible way of repairing
the injured spinal cord [1,2]. Autologous bone marrow-
derived mesenchymal stem cells (BMSCs) are one type
of stem cells that have been well-reported on in spinal
cord injury studies [3,4].

Intrathecal transplantation is an attractive approach
for BMSC transplantation because it requires a simple
technique and less invasive approach. Intrathecal BMSC
transplantation allows for the efficient delivery of cells to
the injured spinal cord [5-9]. Intrathecal transplantation
can deliver BMSCs to the spinal cord through the
blood–brain barrier in rat models; moreover, BMSCs in-
fused into cerebrospinal fluid promote functional recov-
ery of
the injured spinal cord, with reduced cavity
formation [8,10,11]. Nevertheless, intrathecal transplant-
ation is not a direct transplant into the injured site of
the spinal cord; the migration of
intrathecally trans-
planted cells at the lumbar level to higher injured areas
such as the cervical spinal cord is questionable in
humans, especially in cases of chronic injured spinal
cord. Cell tracking technology would help to gain more
information regarding cell migration in intrathecal
transplantation.

Cell labeling with superparamagnetic iron oxide nano-
particles (SPIONs) is an interesting choice for stem cell
tracking in cases of spinal cord injury [12,13]. It is an
intracellular labeling that provides high specificity for
tracking living cells. Labeling cells with SPIONs is sim-
ple to prepare and, in low doses, does not affect the pro-
liferation and differentiation of cells [14-16]. Moreover,
cells labeled with SPIONs are detectable using magnetic
resonance imaging (MRI), which is useful for clinical
evaluation.

We describe the case of a patient with a chronic cer-
vical spinal cord injury who was enrolled in a study
which attempted to track BMSCs labeled with SPIONS
after intrathecal transplantation. In addition, the clinical
outcomes and safety of using intrathecal SPION-labeled
BMSC transplantation was evaluated.

Case presentation
We conducted a pilot study for patients with a complete
or incomplete spinal cord injury at the cervical spine
level, occurring more than two years previously. Our pa-
tient was recruited from the spinal unit at Siriraj Hospital
(Bangkok, Thailand). The protocol
for this study was
reviewed and approved by the local ethics committee
(Ethics Committee for Research in Humans, Faculty of
Medicine Siriraj Hospital, Mahidol University (approval

number: Si084/2009). This research was registered With
Thai Clinical Trials Registry (www.clinicaltrials.in.th); the
register number is 20140611001). Our patient was the sole
patient to enroll in this pilot study.

Our patient was a 33-year-old Thai man who sustained
an incomplete spinal cord injury, quadriparesis, from
atlantoaxial subluxation. MRI showed that his spinal
cord was compressed from the posterior arch of the
atlas. He was reduced with traction and received atlan-
toaxial fusion with wiring and post-operative cervical
spine maintenance using Halo vest immobilization in
May, 2005. Neurological deficits had partially improved
from the operation. At four years and six months later,
his neurological condition was still quadriparesis, and he
was still dependent on respiratory support via a trache-
ostomy. His respiratory functions and motor power
functions did not improved any further, despite intensive
rehabilitation treatment. His sensory function was mainly
preserved, however, neuropathic pain was predominant
over his entire body, especially on his left side. His cervical
spine was evaluated with a computed tomography (CT)
scan for bony fusion, and his atlantoaxial joint had already
fused. His spinal cord lesion was evaluated with 3.0 Tesla
MRI in 2009. His cervical spinal cord at the C1-C2 level
was small in diameter, representative of atrophic myelo-
malacia change of his cervical spinal cord from level C1 to
the intervertebral disc of level C2-C3 (Figure 1).

We discussed this study with our patient and his fam-
ily thoroughly to avoid any ethical issues. He and his
family made the decision and provided signed informed
consent to be enrolled in this study.

A total of 200mL of bone marrow aspiration was
harvested from his iliac crest. Mononuclear cells
were separated with Ficoll-Hypaque density gradient
centrifugation (IsoPrep®, Robbins Scientific, Sunny-
vale, CA, USA). The mononuclear cells were cultured
with Dulbecco’s modified eagle’s medium (DMEM)
(Gibco®, Life TechnologiesTM, NY, USA) with 10%
fetal bovine serum (Biochrom, Berlin, Germany). The
culture was maintained at 37°C in a humidified at-
mosphere of 5% carbon dioxide. Culture medium was
replaced every four days. The cells were maintained
in the primary culture for four weeks in order to in-
crease the number of cells. The target number of cul-
ture stem cells was 30×106 cells. A sample of the
BMSCs was cultured to test for bacteria and fungus;
the results were negative. Half of the BMSCs (15×106 cells)
were separated for labeling with SPIONs. The superpara-
magnetic iron oxide agent (Resovist®, Schering, Berlin,
Germany) was administered to the culture medium at a
concentration of 100μg/mL and the transfection agent
(protamine
(Leo Pharmaceutical, Ballerup,
Denmark)) was also administered to the culture medium
at a concentration of 4μg/mL, which was then mixed for

sulphate

Chotivichit et al. Journal of Medical Case Reports  (2015) 9:79 

Page 3 of 7

Figure 1 Cervical spinal cord magnetic resonance imaging scan prior to stem cell transplantation. Sagittal and axial T2-weighting (A, C)
and axial T1-weighting (B) scans revealed the small diameter of the cervical spinal cord at the C1-C2 level, which demonstrated the atrophic
change of the spinal cord (arrowhead).

approximately 10 minutes. Following mixing, 12.5mL of
the labeling medium was added to an 80% confluent
BMSC monolayer in a 150cm2 cell culture flask. After two
hours of incubation, an equal volume of complete DMEM
was added to the cultures for a final SPION concentration
of 50μg/mL. Cell cultures were incubated overnight.
Samples were washed with phosphate-buffered saline
(PBS) containing heparin (Leo Pharmaceutical, Ballerup,
Denmark) at a concentration of 10 US Pharmacopeia
(USP) units/mL. The BMSCs labeled with SPIONs and
the unlabeled BMSCs were mixed and re-suspended in
normal saline. Intrathecal BMSC transplantation was per-
formed at the lumbar spine. Then, an immediate MRI
scan was carried out to confirm that the BMSCs were
injected into the arachnoid space. After intrathecal BMSC
transplantation, he was set in the Trendelenburg position
for 24 hours.

We performed MRI scans using a 3.0 Tesla Philips
Achieva MRI scanner (Philips Medical Systems, Best,
Netherlands) with a combination of two different phase
array coils: a sensitivity encoding (SENSE) spine coil and
a SENSE- neurovascular coil, a combination in terms of
dual-coil imaging. We examined the T1-weighted sagittal
spin echo images (the repetition time (TR)=584 millisec-
onds; the echo time (TE)=6.6 milliseconds; slice thick-
ness=2.0mm;
field of view=25×25cm; matrix=288×230;
and number of excitations=8 (NEX)) and the T2-weighted

sagittal fast spin echo images (TR= 4017 milliseconds;
TE=100 millisecond repetition time; slice thickness=2.0mm;
field of view=25×25cm; matrix=352×308; and NEX=8) of
each patient. T2-star echo images (TR=14.8 milliseconds;
TE=multiechoes=3.57/4.93/6.29/7.65/9.0/10.36/11.72/13.08;
slice thickness=3.0mm; field of view=15×15cm; matrix=
152×144; and NEX=4). The MRI scan was performed im-
mediately after stem cell transplantation. In addition, the
same protocol of whole spinal axis MRI was performed at
two days, two weeks, one month and seven months after
the transplant.

At 48 hours after transplantation, he had a fever
(temperature: 38 to 38.5°C), headache and myalgia.
There were transient neurological deficits. All key mus-
cles by the American Spinal Injury Association (ASIA)
impairment scale decreased by one grade of all key mus-
cles by ASIA Impairment scale,
followed by loss of
penile erection the next morning; however, his sensory
by ASIA impairment scale was still intact. His physical
examination revealed no stiff neck and his CBC revealed
mild leukocytosis. Hemocultures were taken and the re-
sults were negative. An immediate MRI scan was per-
formed and did not reveal any significant change. He
was treated with 10mg intravenous dexamethasone every
six hours for two days. His neurological status had im-
proved to pre-transplant status within 12 hours after the
dexamethasone treatment. For the first six months after

Chotivichit et al. Journal of Medical Case Reports  (2015) 9:79 

Page 4 of 7

Table 1 Summary of clinical data from pre-operative time to 12 months post-operative time

ASIA impairment scale

Respirator

Motor score

Upper limbs motor score

Lower limbs motor score

Sensory score

Light touch score

Pin prick score

Neuropathic pain

Preoperative data

B

dependent

Postoperative data
2 days
B

dependent

6 months
B

dependent

18

4

109

108

+

10

2

109

108

+

18

4

109

108

+

12 months
B

dependent

18

4

109

108

++

transplantation there was no change in both neuro-
logical status and respiratory function. At 12 months
after the transplantation, his neuropathic pain increased
on both sides of his body. At present, his left side is still
experiencing more pain than his right side and his re-
spiratory
changed,
remaining respirator-dependent (Table 1).

function has not

significantly

stem cell

A 3.0 Tesla MRI scan of his spine was performed im-
mediately after
transplantation. The T2-
weighted scan of his whole spine and axial T2-weighted
scan of his lumbar spine showed hyposignal intensity of
paramagnetic substance tagged stem cells in the sub-
arachnoid space and some in the area of the cauda
equina, but no demonstrable hyposignal intensity at the

Figure 2 Magnetic resonance imaging scan of the cervical spine taken one day after stem cell transplantation via lumbar puncture
technique. A sagittal T2-weighted scan of his whole spine (A, B) and an axial T2-star scan of his lumbar spine (C) shows hyposignal intensity of
paramagnetic substance tagged stem cells in the subarachnoid space of the lumbar spine and some in the cauda equina. No demonstrable
paramagnetic tagged stem cell was seen at the cervical spine level. (White arrow; hyposignal intensity in the subarachnoid space at
lumbar spine).

Chotivichit et al. Journal of Medical Case Reports  (2015) 9:79 

Page 5 of 7

cervical spine level (Figure 2). At 48 hours, there was
focal hyposignal intensity of tagged stem cells at the in-
jured cervical spinal cord; the focal hyposignal intensity
of tagged stem cells faded at two weeks and had disap-
peared in the MRI scans taken at two months and seven
months (Figure 3). There was no change of spinal cord
structure in any follow-up MRI scans.

Discussion
Intrathecal transplantation is one of the less invasive
procedures for stem cell transplantation in spinal cord
injury. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first
clinical human case to show positive evidence of track-
ing stem cell migration from intrathecal transplantation
at the lumbar region to the cervical region in chronic
spinal cord injury. The SPION signals could be detected
by serial MRI scans at the injured cervical spinal cord
after intrathecal transplantation at the lumbar level.

In previous clinical studies, the intrathecal stem cell
transplantation was mainly focused on clinical outcomes
(motor improvement, sensory improvement or electro-
physiology) [12,17,18]. There is only one report from
Callera and de Melo [19] which evaluated the migration
of autologous bone marrow CD34+ cells, extracellularly
labeled with magnetic beads, after intrathecal transplant-
ation. The study detected a hypointense signal at the
chronic injured spinal cord but the migrated cells could
not reach up to the injured cervical spinal cord [19].
However, in our case, the transplanted cells could reach

up to the injured cervical spinal cord. It is possible that
the setting of our patient in the Trendelenburg position
for 24 hours after the transplantation allowed the cells
to fall from the lumbar to the cervical level; the question
of whether this is the reason for the upward migration
of cells requires further studies.

Tracking cells with SPION labeling by MRI is based
on the use of magnetic particles. This technique is
straight forward in locating the transplanted cells [20].
The signal intensity which is detected by MRI can be
readily identified and correlated with imaging anatomy;
this would be an advantage for evaluation of the effect-
iveness of the transplantation process [21]. Nevertheless,
the viability and function of BMSCs could not be evalu-
ated with this direct cell labeling technique [22]. The
hyposignal intensity from SPION labeling which is de-
tected by MRI could not distinguish the viable cells from
the dead cells or macrophages [23]. The fading of focal
hyposignal intensity at the two-week follow-up MRI scan
could be due to the division of viable cells or from the
scavenging of dead cells by macrophages [22,23]. The
fading of hyposignal intensity at the two-week follow-up
MRI scan remained sufficient to track the transplanted
stem cells; however, it would not be enough for tracking
long-term cell survival.

There are new techniques for tracking and monitoring
the viability of transplanted cells, such as reporter gene
imaging, which uses specific probes to express reporter
proteins from living cells. The reporter signals can be

Figure 3 Timeline of axial T2-star echo5 magnetic resonance imaging scans of his cervical spine at the C1 level on pre-transplantation
(A), two days (B), two weeks (C), one month (D) and seven months (E) after stem cell transplantation. The axial T2-star scan taken two
days after stem cell transplantation (B) showed focal hyposignal intensity of tagged stem cells in the surface of the pathological upper cervical
cord (arrow) at the axial T2-star scan taken two weeks after stem cell transplantation showed fading of the focal hyposignal intensity of tagged
stem cells (C), which disappeared on the scans taken at one and seven months.

Chotivichit et al. Journal of Medical Case Reports  (2015) 9:79 

Page 6 of 7

identified with many kinds of imaging, such as MRI,
positron emission tomography (PET) scanning or bio-
luminescence imaging [23,24]. However, the concern of
using reporter gene imaging in humans is mutagenesis
from processes that require some transfection of genetic
materials [23,24].

The neurological deficit in our patient was not signifi-
cantly improved from the treatment; moreover, the un-
pleasant neuropathic pain increased obviously. The other
complications that occurred in our patient were headache,
fever and transient neurological deficit. These complica-
tions were reported in the previous literature of intra-
thecal stem cell transplantation, even without stem cell
labeling [25-27]. There are some possible causes of the
immunological reaction from this procedure. The first
possibility is contamination from bovine serum in the cul-
ture process, despite multiple washing before transplant-
ation. The second possibility is the reaction of the body
toward SPIONs remnant during the transplantation pro-
cedure, or the spreading of SPIONs from apoptosis of
BMSCs. Although the clinical safety of SPIONs in liver
parenchymal MRI is proven, they might stimulate the im-
mune system in the arachnoid space. Therefore, the intra-
thecal transplantation of stem cells should be closely
observed in the first 48 hours after transplantation. The
role of prophylaxis, such as steroids as a pre-medication
to prevent immune reaction, may be considered in further
studies.

Our case report clearly demonstrates the existence of
signal intensity SPIONs at the injured site, away from
the administered site. Nevertheless, the engraftment,
viability and function of the cells could not be evalu-
ated, along with the limitations of the SPIONs labeling
technique.

Conclusions
Intrathecal injection of the cells at the lumbar spine level
could deliver the BMSCs to the chronic injured spinal
cord at the upper cervical level. The BMSCs labeled with
SPIONs could be detected by the hyposignal intensity
with serial MRI. Transient complications should be
observed closely in first 48 hours after transplantation.
Further study should be carried out to evaluate the
result of the treatment.

Consent
Written informed consent was obtained from the patient
for publication of this case report and any accompanying
images. A copy of the written consent is available for
review by the Editor-in-Chief of this journal.

Abbreviations
BMSCs: Bone marrow-derived mesenchymal stem cells; CT: Computed
tomography; DMEM: Dulbecco’s modified eagle’s medium; MRI: Magnetic
resonance imaging; NEX: Number of excitations; SENSE: Sensitivity encoding;

SPIONs: Superparamagnetic iron oxide nanoparticles; TE: The echo time;
TR: The repetition time.

Competing interests
The authors declare that they have no competing interests. The manuscript
submitted does not contain information about medical device(s) or drug(s).
No benefits in any form have been or will be received from a commercial
party related directly or indirectly to the subject of this manuscript.

Authors’ contributions
AC designed the study, drafted the manuscript and performed the bone
marrow harvest procedure. MR performed the bone marrow harvest
procedure, coordinated the study, collected data and drafted the
manuscript. PC performed and interpreted the imaging study. AW carried
out the cell preparation and molecular study. KS performed the cell
transplantation. All authors read and approved the final manuscript.

Acknowledgements
This study was funded by Siriraj Research Funding (grant number:
R015232040) of the Faculty of Medicine Siriraj Hospital, Mahidol University
awarded to AC. This study protocol was approved by the Institutional
Review Board of Faculty of Medicine Siriraj Hospital, Mahidol University,
Thailand (approval number: Si084/2009). This Study was registered with the
Thai Clinical Trial Registry (identifier: TCTR 20140611001).
The authors would like to express their gratitude to Ms Sunisa Duangsa-ard
for her assistance in cell preparation, and Dr Pairash Saiviroonporn for his
assistance in MRI study. AC, MR and AW are recipients of Chalermprakiat
Fund of the Faculty of Medicine Siriraj Hospital, Mahidol University.

Author details
1Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Faculty of Medicine Siriraj Hospital,
Mahidol University, 2 Prannok Rd, Bangkoknoi, Bangkok 10700, Thailand.
2Department of Radiology, Faculty of Medicine Siriraj Hospital, Mahidol
University, 2 Prannok Rd, Bangkoknoi, Bangkok 10700, Thailand. 3Department
of Pharmacology, Faculty of Medicine Siriraj Hospital, Mahidol University, 2
Prannok Rd, Bangkoknoi, Bangkok 10700, Thailand. 4Department of
Anesthesiology, Faculty of Medicine Siriraj Hospital, Mahidol University, 2
Prannok Rd, Bangkoknoi, Bangkok 10700, Thailand.

Received: 18 September 2014 Accepted: 28 January 2015

References
1. McDonald JW, Liu XZ, Qu Y, Liu S, Mickey SK, Turetsky D, et al. Transplanted
embryonic stem cells survive, differentiate and promote recovery in injured
rat spinal cord. Nat Med. 1999;5:1410–2.

2. Woodbury D, Schwarz EJ, Prockop DJ, Black IB. Adult rat and human bone

3.

4.

5.

6.

7.

8.

9.

marrow stromal cells differentiate into neurons. J Neurosci Res. 2000;61:364–70.
Hofstetter CP, Schwarz EJ, Hess D, Widenfalk J, El Manira A, Prockop DJ,
et al. Marrow stromal cells form guiding strands in the injured spinal cord
and promote recovery. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2002;99:2199–204.
Zurita M, Vaquero J. Bone marrow stromal cells can achieve cure of chronic
paraplegic rats: functional and morphological outcome one year after
transplantation. Neurosci Lett. 2006;402:51–6.
Fan L, Du F, Cheng BC, Peng H, Liu SQ. Migration and distribution of bone
marrow stromal cells in injured spinal cord with different transplantation
techniques. Chin J Traumatol. 2008;11:94–7.
Bakshi A, Hunter C, Swanger S, Lepore A, Fischer I. Minimally invasive
delivery of stem cells for spinal cord injury: advantages of the lumbar
puncture technique. J Neurosurg. 2004;1:330–7.
Satake K, Lou J, Lenke LG. Migration of mesenchymal stem cells through
cerebrospinal fluid into injured spinal cord tissue. Spine. 2004;29:1971–9.
Bakshi A, Barshinger AL, Swanger SA, Madhavani V, Shumsky JS, Neuhuber
B, et al. Lumbar puncture delivery of bone marrow stromal cells in spinal
cord contusion: a novel method for minimally invasive cell transplantation.
J Neurotrauma. 2006;23:55–65.
Shi E, Kazui T, Jiang X, Washiyama N, Yamashita K, Terada H, et al. Intrathecal
injection of bone marrow stromal cells attenuates neurologic injury after spinal
cord ischemia. Ann Thorac Surg. 2006;81:2227–33. discussion 2233–2224.

10. Ohta M, Suzuki Y, Noda T, Ejiri Y, Dezawa M, Kataoka K, et al. Bone marrow

stromal cells infused into the cerebrospinal fluid promote functional

Chotivichit et al. Journal of Medical Case Reports  (2015) 9:79 

Page 7 of 7

recovery of the injured rat spinal cord with reduced cavity formation. Exp
Neurol. 2004;187:266–78.

11. Nakano N, Nakai Y, Seo TB, Homma T, Yamada Y, Ohta M, et al. Effects of

bone marrow stromal cell transplantation through CSF on the subacute and
chronic spinal cord injury in rats. PLoS One. 2013;8:e73494.

12. Bull E, Madani SY, Sheth R, Seifalian A, Green M, Seifalian AM. Stem cell tracking

13.

14.

using iron oxide nanoparticles. Int J Nanomedicine. 2014;9:1641–53.
Sykova E, Jendelova P, Herynek V. MR tracking of stem cells in living
recipients. Methods Mol Biol. 2009;549:197–215.
Jasmin XX, Torres AL, Nunes HM, Passipieri JA, Jelicks LA, Gasparetto EL,
et al. Optimized labeling of bone marrow mesenchymal cells with
superparamagnetic iron oxide nanoparticles and in vivo visualization by
magnetic resonance imaging. J Nanobiotechnol. 2011;9:4.

15. Arbab AS, Yocum GT, Rad AM, Khakoo AY, Fellowes V, Read EJ, et al.

Labeling of cells with ferumoxides-protamine sulfate complexes does not
inhibit function or differentiation capacity of hematopoietic or mesenchymal
stem cells. NMR Biomed. 2005;18:553–9.

17.

16. Balakumaran A, Pawelczyk E, Ren J, Sworder B, Chaudhry A, Sabatino M, et al.
Superparamagnetic iron oxide nanoparticles labeling of bone marrow stromal
(mesenchymal) cells does not affect their “stemness”. PLoS One. 2010;5:e11462.
Saito F, Nakatani T, Iwase M, Maeda Y, Murao Y, Suzuki Y, et al. Administration
of cultured autologous bone marrow stromal cells into cerebrospinal fluid in
spinal injury patients: a pilot study. Restor Neurol Neurosci. 2012;30:127–36.
Jiang PC, Xiong WP, Wang G, Ma C, Yao WQ, Kendell SF, et al. A clinical trial
report of autologous bone marrow-derived mesenchymal stem cell
transplantation in patients with spinal cord injury. Exp Ther Med.
2013;6:140–6.

18.

21.

20.

19. Callera F, de Melo CM. Magnetic resonance tracking of magnetically labeled
autologous bone marrow CD34+ cells transplanted into the spinal cord via
lumbar puncture technique in patients with chronic spinal cord injury: CD34+
cells’ migration into the injured site. Stem Cells Dev. 2007;16:461–6.
Li L, Jiang W, Luo K, Song H, Lan F, Wu Y, et al. Superparamagnetic iron oxide
nanoparticles as MRI contrast agents for non-invasive stem cell labeling and
tracking. Theranostics. 2013;3:595–615.
Song F, Tian M, Zhang H. Molecular imaging in stem cell therapy for spinal
cord injury. Biomed Res Int. 2014;2014:759514.
Sandu N, Spiriev T, Schaller B. Stem cell transplantation in neuroscience: the
role of molecular imaging. Stem Cell Rev. 2012;8:1265–6.
Li Z, Suzuki Y, Huang M, Cao F, Xie X, Connolly AJ, et al. Comparison of
reporter gene and iron particle labeling for tracking fate of human
embryonic stem cells and differentiated endothelial cells in living subjects.
Stem Cells. 2008;26:864–73.
Spiriev T, Sandu N, Schaller B. Molecular imaging and tracking stem cells in
neurosciences. Methods Mol Biol. 2013;1052:195–201.
Kishk NA, Gabr H, Hamdy S, Afifi L, Abokresha N, Mahmoud H, et al. Case
control series of intrathecal autologous bone marrow mesenchymal stem
cell therapy for chronic spinal cord injury. Neurorehabil Neural Repair.
2010;24:702–8.

25.

22.

23.

24.

26. Hofstetter CP, Holmstrom NA, Lilja JA, Schweinhardt P, Hao J, Spenger C,
et al. Allodynia limits the usefulness of intraspinal neural stem cell grafts;
directed differentiation improves outcome. Nat Neurosci. 2005;8:346–53.
Karussis D, Karageorgiou C, Vaknin-Dembinsky A, Gowda-Kurkalli B, Gomori
JM, Kassis I, et al. Safety and immunological effects of mesenchymal stem
cell transplantation in patients with multiple sclerosis and amyotrophic
lateral sclerosis. Arch Neurol. 2011;67:1187–94.

27.

Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central
and take full advantage of: 

• Convenient online submission

• Thorough peer review

• No space constraints or color ﬁgure charges

• Immediate publication on acceptance

• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar

• Research which is freely available for redistribution

Submit your manuscript at 
www.biomedcentral.com/submit

