Yilmaz et al. Journal of Medical Case Reports  (2015) 9:83 
DOI 10.1186/s13256-015-0555-2

JOURNAL OF MEDICAL
CASE REPORTS

CA SE R EP O R T
Glioblastoma multiforme in Klippel-Trenaunay-
Weber syndrome: a case report
Tevfik Yilmaz, Ulas Cikla, Alice Kirst and Mustafa K Baskaya*

Open Access

Abstract

Introduction: Klippel-Trenaunay-Weber syndrome (KTWS) is a rare syndrome in which patients usually present with
cutaneous hemangiomas, venous varicosities, and bone and soft tissue hypertrophy of the affected limb. Intracranial
lesions in patients with KTWS are extremely rare, and are generally reported as single cases in the literature. We
describe a rare case, where a patient with KTWS was found with a hemorrhagic grade IV astrocytoma. Although
central nervous system abnormalities such as intracranial aneurysms and cerebral and spinal cord cavernomas have
been described in patients with KTWS, to the best of our knowledge, this is the first report of an association between
glioblastoma multiforme (grade IV astrocytoma) and KTWS in the English-language medical literature.
Case presentation: A 61-year-old white Caucasian man with a history of KTWS presented with seizures. Left upper
and lower extremity hypertrophy, left foot, leg and ear gigantism and left-sided abdominal capillary hemangiomas
were noted in the physical examination. Cranial computed tomography (CT) and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI)
were obtained, showing a heterogeneous lesion in the cingulate gyrus, with peripheral and central areas of T1
hyperintensity and layering T2 hypointensity consistent with a hemorrhage. A right parasagittal frontal craniotomy was
performed with an interhemispheric approach. We had difficulty controlling the bleeding with bipolar electrocautery
during surgery and finally were able to stop the bleeding using surgicel and gelfoam. Postoperative cranial CT and MRI
scans showed intraparenchymal hemorrhage centered within the medial right frontal lobe. There was no increase in
hematoma size in consecutive CT scans.
Conclusions: Co-occurrence of vascular abnormalities with KWTS should be taken into consideration to avoid perilous
preoperative and postoperative complications.
Keywords: Klippel-Trenaunay-Weber syndrome, Glioblastoma multiforme, Congenital vascular anomalies, Bleeding

Introduction
Klippel-Trenaunay-Weber syndrome (KTWS) is a con-
genital vascular disorder characterized by cutaneous
capillary hemangiomas (port-wine stains), venous vari-
cosities, and osseous and soft tissue hypertrophy. Many
theories have been developed since the discovery of
KTWS; however, the etiology of the syndrome is still
unknown. The general assumption outlines a polygenic
etiology involving defects in angiogenesis and growth
regulation of vessels and tissue [1]. Intracranial lesions
in patients with KTWS are extremely rare, and are
generally reported as single cases in the literature [2-6].
Astrocytoma grade IV is the most common malig-
nant primary brain tumor in adults. Although many

* Correspondence: m.baskaya@neurosurgery.wisc.edu
Department of Neurological Surgery, School of Medicine and Public Health,
University of Wisconsin, 750 Highland Avenue, Madison, WI, USA

KTWS-associated neuropathologic comorbidities have
been described in the literature, to our knowledge astro-
cytoma grade IV has not yet been reported as one of
these comorbidities. This manuscript describes a rare
case, where a patient with KTWS was found with a
hemorrhagic astrocytoma grade IV. Necessary prepara-
tory steps should be taken to avoid complications caused
by vascular pathologies that may co-exist with patholo-
gies of KTWS.

Case presentation
A 61-year-old white Caucasian man with history of
KTWS presented with seizures. Our patient had been
diagnosed with KTWS at the age of seven after an epi-
sode of rectal bleeding. Upon neurological examination,
our patient was able to follow commands and move all
extremities, and exhibited mild left drift. Left upper and

© 2015 Yilmaz et al.; licensee BioMed Central. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and
reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly credited. The Creative Commons Public Domain
Dedication waiver (http://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/) applies to the data made available in this article,
unless otherwise stated.

Yilmaz et al. Journal of Medical Case Reports  (2015) 9:83 

Page 2 of 5

Figure 1 Pilot image (A) and the computed tomography scan with coronal (B) and axial (C) cuts of the left lower extremity showing
hypertrophy of the left leg.

lower extremity hypertrophy, left foot, leg and ear gi-
gantism and left-sided abdominal capillary hemangiomas
were noted upon physical examination (Figure 1A, B, C).
A head computerized tomography (CT) scan without
contrast was obtained, showing a hypodense lesion with
peripheral bleeding in the anteromedial right frontal lobe
(Figure 2). Cranial magnetic resonance imaging (MRI)
showed a heterogeneous lesion in the cingulate gyrus,
with peripheral and central areas of T1 hyperintensity
and layering T2 hypointensity consistent with the
hemorrhage. There was minimal rim enhancement along

Figure 2 Preoperative non-contrast axial computed tomography
showing a hypodense lesion with peripheral bleeding in the right
anterior cingulate gyrus.

the inferior margin of the hemorrhage (Figure 3A, B,
C, D). A right parasagittal
frontal craniotomy was
performed with an interhemispheric approach. A
hemorrhagic mass was identified and operative micro-
scopic impression was consistent with malignant intrinsic
brain tumor. Although there was no extraordinarily
excessive bleeding more than usually seen in high-grade
gliomas during resection of the mass, as we resected
the mass and reached relatively normal-looking white
matter, we encountered more bleeding from the white
matter. We had a hard time controlling the bleeding
with bipolar electrocautery and finally were able to
stop the bleeding with surgicel and gelfoam. Platelets
and plasma were transfused during surgery and dur-
ing the postoperative period. Postoperative cranial CT
and MRI scans showed intraparenchymal hemorrhage cen-
tered within the medial right frontal lobe (Figure 4A, B).
There was no increase in hematoma size in consecu-
tive CT scans. Our patient did not develop any add-
itional neurologic deficit in his postoperative course.
Our patient had rectal bleeding and the colonoscopic
data showed bleeding in the distal colon and mid-
sigmoid colon. In the surrounding mesentery were nu-
merous nodular and tubular sections of soft
tissue
with density likely to represent enlarged vasculature
and vascular malformations in this area. The process
was described to be possibly related to the patient’s
KTWS and the marked colonic wall thickening was
possibly related to varices and vascular malformations,
although it was nonspecific by imaging. Our patient
was followed up and treated in line with the recom-
mendations of the hematology and gastroenterology
clinics, and he was eventually discharged after his gen-
eral situation improved. Histopathology was reported
as a grade IV astrocytoma. Our patient refused to have
any adjunctive treatment and eventually died five
months after the surgery due to the progression of his
intracranial disease.

Yilmaz et al. Journal of Medical Case Reports  (2015) 9:83 

Page 3 of 5

Figure 3 Axial echo gradient (A) and T1 postcontrast (B) and sagittal precontrast (C) and postcontrast (D) magnetic resonance imaging scans
showing peripheral contrast uptake and a hemorrhagic heterogeneous lesion located in the right cingulate gyrus.

Discussion
KTWS is a rare congenital phakomatosis, characterized
by asymmetric limb hypertrophy, cutaneous hemangi-
omas and varicosities. Capillary malformations are the
prevailing lesions (seen in 98% of patients), which in-
clude port-wine stains. Venous anomalies are seen in
72%, and include hypoplasia or aplasia of veins, persist-
ence of fetal veins, varicosities, hypertrophy, tortuosity
and valvular malformations. Soft tissue hypertrophy is

present in 67% of cases [7]. KTWS is diagnosed when at
least two of these cardinal features are met. Other signs
in patients with KTWS include bleeding, thrombophle-
bitis, lymphatic malformation and lymphedema, hyper-
pigmentation, ankle ulcers and other dermal findings of
varicosis [8].

Astrocytoma grade IV is the most malignant form of
central nervous system tumors, and current therapies
are largely ineffective at treating the cancer. Although a

Figure 4 Postoperative imaging including computed tomography scan (A) and T2 axial (B) magnetic resonance imaging scan showing expansile
postoperative hemorrhage.

Yilmaz et al. Journal of Medical Case Reports  (2015) 9:83 

Page 4 of 5

common brain tumor, astrocytoma grade IV in KTWS
has not been previously reported.

In regard to neurovascular comorbidities, it should be
noted that KTWS has been reported with accompanying
central nervous system abnormalities in the literature.
Aneurysmal dilatation is common, but cerebral or spinal
arteriovenous malformations, persistent embryological
veins, orbitofrontal varices, multiple aneurysms, menin-
giomatosis, epidural or vertebral hemangiomas, multiple
cerebral and spinal cord cavernomas, venous malforma-
tions and duplications, hypo and aplasia have also been
reported [2,5,6,9,10].

It must be noted that an abundance of these vascular
pathologies leads to an increase in the surgical complica-
tion rate. It was reported preoperatively 27% of patients
had a history of recurrent bleeding [7,11]. The under-
lying causes are venous or capillary malformations [12].
Venous malformation is the main pathology. Recurrent
bleeding was very common among patients in the
current review, and some patients required frequent
transfusion [11]. Both sufficient intravascular access and
adequate blood product reserve are of paramount im-
portance for the management of KTWS surgery, which
potentially involves massive hemorrhage. Blood loss to
18,000mL has been reported [11]. A brain hemorrhage
can occur due to a capillary or venous malformation,
and hypercoagulability may induce ischemic stroke
[4,13]. Vascular malformations that coexist with KTWS
may become a source of platelet sequestration and fi-
brinogen consumption, with a bleeding diathesis result-
ing from chronic localized intravascular consumptive
coagulopathy [14]. Some authors also reported acute
changes in coagulation status that develop in response
to surgical procedures [15], which suggests a close post-
operative monitoring of coagulation parameters in this
particular patient population is necessary. A coagulation
panel
including partial thromboplastin time and pro-
thrombin time is necessary to effectively monitor coagu-
lation status in patients with KTWS both pre- and
postoperatively [4].

Mason et al. [16] reported effective embolization in
patients with noticeable coagulopathy secondary to a
venous malformation following preoperative prophylaxis
with platelets, cryoprecipitate or fresh-frozen plasma to
facilitate thrombosis. Furthermore it has been reported
that, during acute hemorrhage, tranexamic acid may
stop bleeding [17]. For severe preoperative coagulopathy,
it is advisable to correct coagulation parameters to re-
duce the risk of intra- and postoperative hemorrhage [4].
Association of KTWS with intracranial pathologies
that may require surgical intervention poses a significant
challenge to the managing team both preoperatively and
postoperatively. In these patients, a full coagulation pro-
file should be studied during the preoperative period.

Since there is not enough experience with any specific
thrombolytic agents that may stop hemorrhage, we rec-
ommended all potential agents such as platelets, cryo-
precipitate, fresh-frozen plasma and tranexamic acid be
readily available intraoperatively. In addition to these
preoperative and perioperative precautions, postoperative
care is of great importance in monitoring hemorrhagic
complications.

Conclusions
Additional vascular pathologies should be considered
during the surgical planning for comorbidities accom-
panying KTWS, and necessary pre- and postoperative
measures should be taken accordingly.

Consent
Written informed consent was obtained from the patient
for publication of this case report and accompanying
images. A copy of the written consent is available for
review by the Editor-in-Chief of this journal.

Abbreviations
CT: computed tomography; KTWS: Klippel-Trenaunay-Weber syndrome;
MRI: magnetic resonance imaging.

Competing interests
The authors declare that they have no competing interests.

Authors’ contributions
TY, UC and MKB designed the study and drafted the manuscript. MKB and AK
edited the manuscript. All authors read and approved the final manuscript.

Acknowledgements
The authors would like to thank Mr. Gregory Kujoth for his technical help in
preparing the manuscript.

Received: 16 September 2014 Accepted: 20 February 2015

References
1.

Oduber CE, van der Horst CM, Hennekam RC. Klippel-Trenaunay
syndrome: diagnostic criteria and hypothesis on etiology. Ann Plast
Surg. 2008;60:217–23.
Boutarbouch M, Ben Salem D, Gire L, Giroud M, Bejot Y, Ricolfi F. Multiple
cerebral and spinal cord cavernomas in Klippel-Trenaunay-Weber syndrome.
J Clin Neurosci. 2010;17:1073–5.
Sadiq MF, Shuaib W. Klippel-Trenaunay syndrome with intracranial
arteriovenous malformation: a rare presentation. Case Rep Radiol.
2014;2014:202160.
Star A, Fuller CE, Landas SK. Intracranial aneurysms in Klippel-Trenaunay-
Weber syndromes: case report. Neurosurgery. 2010;66:1027–8.
Djindjian M, Djindjian R, Hurth M, Rey A, Houdart R. Spinal cord
arteriovenous malformations and the Klippel-Trenaunay-Weber syndrome.
Surg Neurol. 1977;8:229–37.
Spallone A, Tcherekayev VA. Simultaneous occurrence of aneurysm and
multiple meningioma in Klippel-Trenaunay patients: case report. Surg
Neurol. 1996;45:241–4.
Sreekar H, Dawre S, Petkar KS, Shetty RB, Lamba S, Naik S, et al. Diverse
manifestations and management options in Klippel-Trenaunay syndrome: a
single centre 10-year experience. J Plast Surg Hand Surg. 2013;47:303–7.
Petzold A, Bischoff C, Conrad B. Repetitive cerebral bleeding in an adult
with Klippel-Trenaunay syndrome. J Neurol. 2000;247:389–91.
Gourie-Devi M, Prakash B. Vertebral and epidural hemangioma with
paraplegia in Klippel-Trenaunay-Weber syndrome. Case report J Neurosurg.
1978;48:814–7.

2.

3.

4.

5.

6.

7.

8.

9.

Yilmaz et al. Journal of Medical Case Reports  (2015) 9:83 

Page 5 of 5

10. Rathbun JE, Hoyt WF, Beard C. Surgical management of orbitofrontal varix
in Klippel-Trenaunay-Weber syndrome. Am J Ophthalmol. 1970;70:109–12.
11. Barbara DW, Wilson JL. Anesthesia for surgery related to Klippel-Trenaunay

syndrome: a review of 136 anesthetics. Anesth Analg. 2011;113:98–102.

12. Baskerville PA, Ackroyd JS, Lea Thomas M, Browse NL. The Klippel-Trenaunay

syndrome: clinical, radiological and haemodynamic features and management.
Br J Surg. 1985;72:232–6.

13. Brunaud V, Delerue O, Muller JP. Destee A [Klippel-Trenaunay syndrome and

ischemic neurologic complications]. Rev Neurol (Paris). 1994;150:50–4.

14. Poon MC, Kloiber R, Birdsell DC. Epsilon-aminocaproic acid in the reversal of

consumptive coagulopathy with platelet sequestration in a vascular
malformation of Klippel-Trenaunay syndrome. Am J Med. 1989;87:211–3.

15. Yamamoto H, Muneta T, Asahina S, Furuya K, Suzuki K. Lower leg fracture
with Parkes-Weber syndrome complicated by disseminated intravascular
coagulation. J Orthop Trauma. 1995;9:449–52.

16. Mason KP, Neufeld EJ, Karian VE, Zurakowski D, Koka BV, Burrows PE.

Coagulation abnormalities in pediatric and adult patients after sclerotherapy
or embolization of vascular anomalies. AJR Am J Roentgenol.
2001;177:1359–63.
Katsaros D, Grundfest-Broniatowski S. Successful management of visceral
Klippel-Trenaunay-Weber syndrome with the antifibrinolytic agent tranexamic
acid (cyclocapron): a case report. Am Surg. 1998;64:302–4.

17.

Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central
and take full advantage of: 

• Convenient online submission

• Thorough peer review

• No space constraints or color ﬁgure charges

• Immediate publication on acceptance

• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar

• Research which is freely available for redistribution

Submit your manuscript at 
www.biomedcentral.com/submit

