Huang and Chang Journal of Medical Case Reports  (2015) 9:63 
DOI 10.1186/s13256-015-0551-6

JOURNAL OF MEDICAL
CASE REPORTS

CA SE R EP O R T
Solitary metastasis to the breast after complete
resection of encapsulated type AB thymoma: a
case report
Pei-Wen Huang and Kuo-Ming Chang*

Open Access

Abstract

Introduction: Type AB thymoma is generally considered a benign tumor with excellent prognosis. Rare case
reports of type A and AB thymomas with recurrence and metastasis have been documented, although extrathoracic
metastases are extremely rare. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first reported case of type AB thymoma with
solitary metastasis to the breast.
Case presentation: We describe an 83-year-old Taiwanese woman with a metastatic thymoma to the breast 10 years
after complete resection of noninvasive and encapsulated primary tumor, and analyze the possible factors to explain
the recurrence and metastasis of the stage I thymomas.
Conclusions: Even a clinically benign tumor such as type AB thymoma still has a possibility of metastasizing to an
unusual site. When any uncommon tumor presents in any site, a suspicion of secondary neoplasm and thorough
clinical history are required.
Keywords: Breast metastasis, Encapsulated thymoma, Type AB

Introduction
Thymomas are neoplasms that arise from or exhibit differ-
entiation towards thymic epithelium. The World Health
Organization (WHO) classification of thymomas is based
on the morphology of epithelial cells as well as the
lymphocyte-to-epithelial cell ratio, and thymomas are
divided into five groups (type A, AB, B1, B2, and B3). In
general, type A, AB and B1 thymomas are considered no/
low-risk groups of tumors with better prognosis than type
B2 and B3 thymomas which are moderate/high-risk tu-
mors [1]. However, rare case reports of type A and AB
thymomas with recurrence and metastasis have been doc-
umented, and extrathoracic metastases are extremely rare.
We describe a case with stage I and type AB thymoma,
which metastasized to the breast 10 years after complete
resection of primary tumor.

* Correspondence: a5523@ms7.mmh.org.tw
Department of Pathology, Mackay Memorial Hospital, Hsinchu, No.690, Sec. 2,
Guangfu Rd, East Dist, Hsinchu City 30071, Taiwan

Case presentation
Clinical summary
An 83-year-old Taiwanese woman found a palpable mass
in her right breast for 1 year. The lesion was approxi-
mately 1cm in greatest dimension last year and had got
larger in the past 6 months. She had a history of type
AB thymoma and was treated with complete tumor re-
section 10 years ago. The thymoma was 15cm in greatest
dimension, encapsulated with focal pericardial adhesion
and without pericapsular invasion (Figure 1). A mammo-
graphy revealed a well-defined hypoechoic oval mass in
10 o'clock direction and 3.0cm away from her nipple,
occupying the whole thickness of her breast, and meas-
uring 4.0×3.2×2.6cm in size (Figure 2). A tumor excision
was performed.

Pathological findings
The specimen consisted of a piece of breast tissue partially
occupied by an oval encapsulated mass that measured
5.0×3.8×3.5cm in size, with focal artificial disruption. The
cut surface of the tumor was tan red and the focal was
light yellowish. The tumor consistency was soft and fra-
gile. On microscopic examination, the well-encapsulated

© 2015 Huang and Chang; licensee BioMed Central. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and
reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly credited. The Creative Commons Public Domain
Dedication waiver (http://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/) applies to the data made available in this article,
unless otherwise stated.

Huang and Chang Journal of Medical Case Reports  (2015) 9:63 

Page 2 of 5

Figure 1 Primary thymoma. (A) The primary thymoma is well-encapsulated without pericapsular invasion. (B) The primary tumor is composed
of a lymphocyte-poor type A thymoma component and lymphocyte-rich type B component.

tumor was composed of neoplastic cells arranged in solid
sheets, vague fascicles or ribbons and few rosettes without
lumen, and admixed with variable amounts of lymphocytes
(Figure 3A-C). The neoplastic cells set in the lymphocyte-
rich background were oval, polygonal or short fusiform,
and had small round-to-oval nuclei with inconspicuous
nucleoli (Figure 3D). The spindle tumor cells were mainly
seen in the lymphocyte-poor area. The two groups of neo-
plastic cells either separated with a discrete border or were
intermixed together. Mild nuclear atypia was occasionally
seen. Mitoses were scanty. Some aggregates of histiocytes

and few dilating and mildly branching thin-walled vessels
were also found. The neoplastic cells were diffusely positive
for cytokeratin (Figure 4A), partially positive for vimentin
and smooth muscle actin, mostly positive for p63, and
focally immunoreactive with epithelial membrane antigen.
A few tumor cells were also positive for CD20 (Figure 4B).
Some spindle neoplastic cells were surrounded by collagen
IV deposition. The tumor cells were negative for CD21
and CD34. The lymphocytes were positive for CD3, CD5,
CD1a, and CD99 (Figure 4C-D). Few scattered individual
and small groups of interdigitating reticulum cells were

Figure 2 Mammography reveals a well-defined hypoechoic oval mass in right breast, occupying the whole thickness of breast, and
measuring 4.0×3.2×2.6cm in size.

Huang and Chang Journal of Medical Case Reports  (2015) 9:63 

Page 3 of 5

Figure 3 Breast tumor. (A) The tumor is well encapsulated and atrophic ductal components are on the left. (B) It is composed of two different
tumor components and admixed with variable amounts of lymphocytes. (C) Some neoplastic cells arranged in rosettes without lumen in the
lymphocyte-poor background. (D) The most neoplastic cells are oval to polygonal or short fusiform with small round-to-oval, pale nuclei and no
or inconspicuous nucleoli, set in the lymphocyte-rich background.

Figure 4 Immunohistochemistry. (A) The neoplastic cells are diffusely positive for cytokeratin, and (B) few are also positive for CD20. The
lymphocytes are positive for (C) CD3 and (D) CD1a.

Huang and Chang Journal of Medical Case Reports  (2015) 9:63 

Page 4 of 5

seen by S-100 protein staining. From these features and
past history, we diagnosed this tumor as a metastatic type
AB thymoma to the breast.

Discussion
We reported a case with metastatic type AB thymoma to
the breast 10 years following the complete resection of
primary noninvasive thymoma. The postoperative recur-
rence rate for noninvasive thymoma has been reported
to be 0 to 7%, and the majority is local recurrence [2].
WHO type A and AB thymomas are generally regarded
as clinically benign neoplasms. However, some studies
document recurrence, metastases and mortality in pa-
tients with these two subtypes [3]. The metastatic sites
of type A and AB thymomas include pleura, lung, liver,
brain, peritoneum, kidney and bone. A mean time inter-
val of 62.25 months (range: 12 to 138 months) between
diagnosis of primary tumor and recurrence or metastasis
has been reported [3].

Metastases from extramammary malignancy to the
breast are also rare and account for approximately 0.3 to
2.7% of all malignant mammary tumors, and less than
500 cases have been reported [4]. Metastatic thymic tu-
mors of the breast are extremely rare. To the best of our
knowledge, only two cases with well-documented meta-
static thymomas to the breast have been reported in the
English literature. One of these had inoperable primary
type B3 thymoma and was treated only with chemother-
apy, and metastatic tumor to the breast occurred in 2
years [5]. The other case had a complete resection for
noninvasive thymoma without metastasis 20 years ago.
With a 19-year interval, a pulmonary metastasis of type
B3 thymoma with pleural invasion developed, then the
breast metastatic tumor occurred 1 year later [6]. In our
case, the patient had neither advanced disease at the pres-
entation nor pulmonary involvement before breast tumor
occurring. She had a solitary metastatic tumor in her right
breast and no other recurrence or metastatic sign shown
in the postoperative image and clinical studies.

Some factors have been proposed to explain the re-
currence and metastasis of stage I thymomas. Previous
series studies revealed intraoperative adhesion of nonin-
vasive thymomas had a significantly higher recurrent
rate [7,8]. The proliferation of fibrovascular tissue during
fibrosis might increase the risk of lymphovascular per-
meation and the possibility of recurrence and metastasis.
A tumor size of 8cm or larger in thymic epithelial tu-
mors was supposed to be an adverse prognostic factor
[9]. The large tumor size might increase the probability
of missing some areas with higher-grade histological type
or microinvasion due to inadequate sampling. Transform-
ation of low-grade to high-grade histology has also been
reported as a cause of recurrence and metastasis [10]. In
our case, pericardium adhesion and large tumor size

(>8cm) were noted in the primary tumor, but tumor cap-
sule or pericardium invasion was absent, and the histo-
logical features of metastatic and primary tumors were
identical. Some studies have suggested that molecular
analysis may be useful for prediction of tumor behavior,
and it needs further research.

Conclusions
Although extrathoracic metastatic thymoma and metasta-
ses from extramammary malignancy to the breast are rare,
accurate diagnosis is important to avoid unnecessary treat-
ment. Besides pathologic and immunohistochemical find-
ings, the clinical history is crucial for differential diagnosis.
Even a clinical benign tumor such as type AB thymoma
still has a possibility of metastasizing to an unusual site.
When any uncommon tumor presents in any site, a suspi-
cion of secondary neoplasm and thorough clinical history
are required.

Consent
Written informed consent was obtained from the patient
for publication of this Case Report and any accompanying
images. A copy of the written consent is available for
review by the Editor-in-Chief of this journal.

Abbreviation
WHO: World Health Organization.

Competing interests
The authors declare that they have no competing interests.

Authors’ contributions
PWH participated in the histopathological evaluation, performed the
literature review, acquired photomicrographs and drafted the manuscript.
KMC gave the final histopathological diagnosis and revised the manuscript.
Both the authors read and approved the final manuscript.

Authors’ information
Pei-Wen Huang is the first author.

Acknowledgments
We thank Dr Chin-Chen Pan (Taipei Veterans General Hospital) for providing
figures of the primary tumor.

Received: 28 August 2014 Accepted: 20 February 2015

References
1.

Travis WD, Brambilla E, Muller-Hermelink HK, Harris CC. The WHO classification
of tumours: pathology and genetics of tumours of the lung, pleura, thymus
and heart, chapter 3 tumours of the thymus. Lyon: IARC Press; 2004. p. 148–53.
Nomori H, Watanabe K, Ohtsuka T, Naruke T, Suemasu K, Orikasa H, et al.
Pulmonary metastasis 12 years after resection of thymoma with microscopic
capsule invasion. Jpn J Clin Oncol. 2004;34:630–3.
Jain RK, Mehta RJ, Henley JD, Kesler KA, Loehrer PJ, Badve S. WHO types A
and AB thymomas: not always benign. Mod Pathol. 2010;23:1641–9.
Lee SK, Kim WW, Kim SH, Hur SM, Kim S, Choi JH, et al. Characteristics of
metastasis in the breast from extramammary malignancies. J Surg Oncol.
2010;101:137–40.
Kwon GY, Hong SA, Hong ME, Park ES, Yoo JH, Lee TJ. Fine needle
aspiration biopsy for the diagnosis of thymoma metastatic to the breast:
a case report. Acta Cytol. 2010;54:798–802.
Kim SM, Ko EY, Han BK, Shin JH, Kang SS, Nam SJ, et al. Metastatic thymoma
of the breast. Korean J Radiol. 2008;9:80–3.

2.

3.

4.

5.

6.

Huang and Chang Journal of Medical Case Reports  (2015) 9:63 

Page 5 of 5

7.

8.

Lewis JE, Wick MR, Scheithauer BW, Bernatz PE, Taylor WF. Thymoma.
A clinicopathologic review. Cancer. 1987;60:2727–43.
Regnard JF, Magdeleinat P, Dromer C, Dulmet E, de Montpreville V, Levi JF,
et al. Prognostic factors and long-term results after thymoma resection: a
series of 307 patients. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 1996;112:376–84.

9. Wright CD, Wain JC, Wong DR, Donahue DM, Gaissert HA, Grillo HC, et al.

Predictors of recurrence in thymic tumors: importance of invasion,
World Health Organization histology, and size. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg.
2005;130:1413–21.

10. Pescarmona E, Rendina EA, Venuta F, Ricci C, Baroni CD. Recurrent

thymoma: evidence for histological progression. Histopathology.
1995;27:445–9.

Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central
and take full advantage of: 

• Convenient online submission

• Thorough peer review

• No space constraints or color ﬁgure charges

• Immediate publication on acceptance

• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar

• Research which is freely available for redistribution

Submit your manuscript at 
www.biomedcentral.com/submit

