Sevinc et al. Journal of Medical Case Reports  (2015) 9:92 
DOI 10.1186/s13256-015-0575-y

JOURNAL OF MEDICAL
CASE REPORTS

CA SE R EP O R T
Plasma resistant atypical hemolytic uremic
syndrome associated with a CFH mutation treated
with eculizumab: a case report
Mustafa Sevinc1*, Taner Basturk1, Tuncay Sahutoglu1, Tamer Sakaci1, Yener Koc1, Elbis Ahbap1, Cuneyt Akgol1,
Ekrem Kara1, Vicky Brocklebank2, Tim HJ Goodship2, David Kavanagh2 and Abdulkadir Unsal1

Open Access

Abstract

Introduction: Thrombotic microangiopathies are a group of diseases presenting as microangiopathic hemolytic
anemia, thrombocytopenia and end-organ dysfunction. As the role of the complement system was elucidated in
atypical hemolytic uremic syndrome pathogenesis, eculizumab was successfully introduced into clinical practice. We
present a large pedigree with multiple individuals carrying a functionally significant novel factor H mutation. We
describe the proband’s presentation following a presumed infectious trigger requiring plasma exchange and
hemodialysis.
Case presentation: A 32-year-old Caucasian woman presented with pyrexia and headache lasting one week to our
Emergency Department. She gave no history of diarrhea or other symptoms to account for her high temperature.
She was not taking any medication. She was pyrexial (38°C), tachycardic (110bpm) and hypertensive (160/110mmHg).
Her fundoscopy revealed grade IV hypertensive retinopathy. She had mild pretibial and periorbital edema, with
oliguria (450mL/day). She had a pregnancy one year previously, during which she had hypertension, proteinuria
and edema, with successful delivery at term. Her mother had died in her early 30s with a clinical picture consistent
with thrombotic microangiopathy. Her laboratory evaluation showed microangiopathic hemolytic anemia. After 22
sessions of plasma exchange, her lactate dehydrogenase levels started to climb. As a result, she was classified as
plasma resistant and eculizumab therapy was instituted. Her lactate dehydrogenase level and platelet count
normalized, and her renal function recovered after three months of dialysis.
Conclusions: We demonstrate that, even in patients with atypical hemolytic uremic syndrome and prolonged
dialysis dependence, recovery of renal function can be seen with eculizumab treatment. We suggest a treatment
regime of at least three months prior to evaluation of efficacy.
Keywords: Eculizumab, Factor H, Complement, Hemolytic uremic syndrome

Introduction
Thrombotic microangiopathies (TMAs) are a group of
conditions characterized by microangiopathic hemolytic
anemia, thrombocytopenia and microvascular occlusion.
These include thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura
(TTP), Shiga toxin-associated hemolytic uremic syn-
drome, disseminated intravascular coagulation, secondary

* Correspondence: musevinc@hotmail.com
1Department of Nephrology, Sisli Hamidiye Etfal Training and Education
Hospital, Halaskargazi Cad. Etfal Sok, 34371 Şişli, Istanbul, Turkey
Full list of author information is available at the end of the article

TMAs (such as those caused by drugs and malignancy)
and atypical hemolytic uremic syndrome (aHUS).

The last 20 years has seen the elucidation of the
pathogenesis of these conditions but, until recently, this
had no bearing on the treatment of disease [1]. TTP, an
acquired or congenital deficiency of ADAMTS13, and
aHUS, an over-activation of the alternative complement
pathway (most commonly inherited), were both treated
with plasma exchange.

More recently eculizumab, a recombinant monoclonal
antibody directed against complement component C5,
has been successfully used in the management of aHUS

© 2015 Sevinc et al.; licensee BioMed Central. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and
reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly credited. The Creative Commons Public Domain
Dedication waiver (http://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/) applies to the data made available in this article,
unless otherwise stated.

Sevinc et al. Journal of Medical Case Reports  (2015) 9:92 

Page 2 of 5

[2]. A non-randomized uncontrolled trial has suggested
improved efficacy over plasma exchange [3]. Despite its
expense, it has revolutionized the management of aHUS,
but has necessitated the rapid differentiation of aHUS
from ADAMTS13 deficiency to allow its use in a timely
manner. Without plasma exchange TTP can be rapidly
fatal, and the clinician needs to be certain that a defi-
ciency of ADAMTS13 is not the cause of the TMA be-
fore plasma exchange can be withdrawn and eculizumab
is initiated.

We demonstrate a functionally significant complement
factor H (CFH) genetic mutation in the proband and
demonstrate incomplete penetrance in her family. We
describe the clinical course, with plasma resistance ne-
cessitating the introduction of eculizumab. We show
that even following prolonged dialysis dependence, eculi-
zumab can prevent the TMA process, allowing renal re-
covery and dialysis independence.

Case presentation
A 32-year-old Caucasian woman presented with pyrexia and
headache lasting one week to our Emergency Department.
She gave no history of diarrhea or other symptoms to ac-
count for her high temperature. She was not taking any
medication. She was pyrexial (38°C), tachycardic (110bpm)
and hypertensive (160/110mmHg). Her fundoscopy revealed
grade IV hypertensive retinopathy. She had mild pretibial
and periorbital edema, with oliguria (450mL/day).

An evaluation of her medical history revealed that she
had hypertension, proteinuria and edema during a

pregnancy one year previously, which she had success-
fully completed to term. No laboratory investigations
were undertaken at that time. Her mother had died in
her early 30s with a clinical picture consistent with a
TMA (Figure 1).

Her laboratory evaluation showed microangiopathic
hemolytic anemia (hemoglobin: 6.6g/dL; unconjugated
bilirubinemia: 2.1mg/dL; lactate dehydrogenase: 1610U/L
(<480U/L); haptoglobin: 10mg/dL (41 to 165mg/dL);
schistocytosis: 5%; negative Coombs test; reticulocytes:
3.68%), thrombocytopenia (120×109/L), albumin 3g/dL
and elevated serum creatinine (12.65mg/dL). Her urinary
examination showed +++ proteinuria and the presence
of eight to ten erythrocytes and two to three leucocytes;
2.4g protein excretion in a 24-hour urine sample. Viral
serologic markers for hepatitis B, hepatitis C and HIV
were negative.

A stool culture was negative for Shiga toxin-producing
Escherichia coli. Her ADAMTS13 activity was within
the normal range (73%), and she was negative for
ADAMTS13 auto-antibodies (13UI/L). Antinuclear anti-
bodies (ANA), anti-extractable nuclear antigens and anti-
double stranded DNA antibodies were negative. Her C4
level was normal (280mg/L) but her C3 level was low
(80mg/dL (85 to 200mg/dL)). An ultrasonography of her
abdomen revealed a normal right kidney but left kidney
agenesis precluded a renal biopsy.

Microangiopathic hemolytic anemia, thrombocytopenia,
renal failure and a likely family history in the setting of
normal ADAMTS13 activity led us to the diagnosis of

Figure 1 Family pedigree. Family pedigree demonstrating affected individuals and unaffected carriers. Current age or age at presentation of
atypical hemolytic uremic syndrome are given in years (y) or months (m). Arrow indicates current patient.

Sevinc et al. Journal of Medical Case Reports  (2015) 9:92 

Page 3 of 5

aHUS, and plasma exchange (40mL/kg fresh frozen plasma
per exchange) was immediately instituted. Hemodialysis
was also required because of hypervolemia as evidenced by
tachypnea, dyspnea, jugular venous distention and intract-
able hypertension, and pulmonary congestion on her chest
X-ray.

Plasma exchange initially improved the biochemical and
hematological markers of disease and treatment contin-
ued. After 22 sessions of plasma exchange, her LDH level
increased to 869U/L and her platelet count fell to 85×109/L,
and it was decided to institute eculizumab therapy
(Figure 2).

Following vaccination against Neisseria meningitides,
eculizumab was introduced at 900mg weekly for the first
four weeks, followed by 1200mg for the fifth dose one
week later and then 1200mg every two weeks thereafter.
Her LDH level normalized and no further plasma ex-
change was required. She had remained dialysis-dependent
throughout her treatment, but following two months of
eculizumab treatment her renal function improved to the
extent that renal replacement therapy was not required. At
20 months into eculizumab treatment her creatinine level
was 1.50mg/dL, with no evidence of microangiopathic

hemolytic anemia. The drug was well tolerated, with no
significant adverse effects.

While management proceeded, genetic analysis was
undertaken to screen for predisposing aHUS risk factors
as previously described. A heterozygous CFH rare genetic
variant in exon 21 was found (c.3454T>A; p.C1152S), with
no other genetic risk factors identified. This resulted in
low levels of circulating CFH 0.32g/L (0.35 to 0.59g/L).
She was negative for factor H autoantibodies.

A factor H analysis of her father (I:1) and sister (II:5)
revealed that they did not carry the variant, but her
three brothers (II:2, II:3, II:4) carried the same mutation.
The brothers’ renal function was normal and their urine
analysis was unremarkable. It is therefore probable that
the CFH mutation was inherited from her mother, and
that the clinical syndrome which led to her death was
aHUS; DNA was not available to confirm this hypothesis.

Discussion
Over the past 15 years, the pathogenesis of aHUS has been
demonstrated to be a disease caused by hyper-activation of
the alternative complement pathway [1]. Mutations in the
complement regulators, CFH [4], complement factor I

Figure 2 Disease course and treatment response. The timeline from presentation detailing platelet and lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) response to
plasma exchange (PE) and eculizumab (Ecu).

Sevinc et al. Journal of Medical Case Reports  (2015) 9:92 

Page 4 of 5

(CFI) [5], and membrane cofactor protein (CD46) [6], the
complement components (C3) [7] and complement factor
B (CFB) [8] have been shown to create a predisposition to
aHUS. This ultimately led to the successful introduction of
the complement inhibitor eculizumab in aHUS manage-
ment [3].

In our case report, our patient carried a mutation in
CFH. Mutations in CFH are the most common mutation
found in aHUS, accounting for around 25% of cases [1].
The majority of mutations in CFH are heterozygous and
usually do not result in a quantitative deficiency of factor
H. Instead they result in a secreted protein which is un-
able to bind to, and regulate, complement on endothelial
cells, including glomerular endothelium [9]. In our case
report, however, the mutation of the invariant cysteine
C1152 prevented the formation of the CysI-CysIII disul-
fide bond with C1109, and thus prevented the formation
of a stable protein. These predicted structural effects are
in keeping with the low plasma factor H levels of our
patient.

As is frequently seen, carriers of CFH mutations may re-
main well for many years before presenting with aHUS fol-
lowing an initiating trigger, such as upper respiratory tract
fevers, pregnancy, drugs and non E. coli
infections,
diarrheal illnesses [1]. Infectious events, mainly upper re-
spiratory tract infections or gastroenteritis, trigger onset of
aHUS in at least half of patients [10,11]. Likewise,
in
pregnancy-associated aHUS, Fakhouri et al. [12] showed
that 86% of patients for whom this was a trigger carried a
complement gene mutation. In our case report it appears
likely that, given our patient’s pyrexia on admission, an un-
identified infection was the trigger. It is also of interest that
during a previous pregnancy she developed hypertension,
proteinuria and edema. Mutations in the complement sys-
tem have also been described in pre-eclampsia [13].

The inheritance pattern in aHUS is most commonly
autosomal dominant, with incomplete penetrance [1].
The proband’s brothers all carry the CFH mutation and
are at risk of aHUS. They have been counselled to attend
for routine hematological and biochemical tests at times
of known triggers, such as infection. The proband has
elected not to screen her children (III:1, III:2, III:3) and
as such, they must be considered to be at risk for aHUS,
with similar advice given.

function.

It has been suggested that

Early treatment of aHUS is essential

in preserving
renal
retinal
changes, such as the cotton wool spots, flame hemor-
rhages and papilledema seen in our patient, are rare in
HUS and TTP [14]. Retinal examination has been shown
to be non-discriminatory for TMAs and should not lead
to a diagnosis of malignant hypertension, with a conse-
quent delay in appropriate treatment [15].

Our patient presented with a platelet count (136×109/L)
and creatinine level (12.65mg/dL) not suggestive of severe

ADAMTS13 deficiency [16]. Her low C3 level, however,
was suggestive of complement alternative pathway activity,
in keeping with aHUS. Eculizumab is now considered to be
the gold standard for management of aHUS. It should not,
however, be used until an ADAMTS13 assay excludes TTP.
Plasma exchange was therefore initiated immediately, but
after an initial response there appeared to be signs of
plasma resistance, and eculizumab was introduced. Bio-
chemical markers of microangiopathic hemolytic anemia
improved and renal function subsequently recovered des-
pite three months of hemodialysis, as has been reported in
other cases [17].

Due to the cost of eculizumab, plasma exchange re-
mains the only treatment available in some parts of the
world. In one study from the Italian Registry, 63% of pa-
tients with a CFH mutation who received some form of
plasmatherapy (plasma infusion or plasma exchange)
had a response to plasma therapy, either complete or
partial (hematological remission with renal sequel) [11].
However, the percentage of complete recovery under
plasmatherapy was only 5%, and evolution to death or
end-stage renal disease was 77%.

Our patient continues on eculizumab; however, a re-
cent report has suggested that eculizumab may be safely
discontinued in some patients, given adequate monitor-
ing [18]. A trial of continuous versus disease-driven ecu-
lizumab therapy is required to elucidate the optimal
length of treatment.

Conclusions
In conclusion, we report a case of familial aHUS associ-
ated with a CFH mutation precipitated most likely by an
infectious trigger. We demonstrate grade IV hypertensive
retinal changes and severe hypertension as a consequence
of aHUS, confirming this as a non-discriminatory sign for
malignant hypertension. Although our patient was dialysis-
dependent, initial treatment with plasma exchange, and
subsequently eculizumab, controlled the disease. After
three months on eculizumab therapy, she became dialysis
independent. This suggests that, in individuals treated
with eculizumab, a minimum duration of three months
should be given prior to cessation in the absence of
renal recovery.

Consent
Written informed consent was obtained from the patient
for publication of this case report and accompanying im-
ages. A copy of the written consent is available for re-
view by the Editor-in-Chief of this journal.

Abbreviations
aHUS: Atypical hemolytic uremic syndrome; CFH: Complement factor H;
CFI: Complement factor I; LDH: Lactate dehydrogenase; TMA: Thrombotic
microangiopathy; TTP: Thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura.

Sevinc et al. Journal of Medical Case Reports  (2015) 9:92 

Page 5 of 5

15.

van den Born BJ, van der Hoeven NV, Groot E, Lenting PJ, Meijers JC, Levi M,
et al. Association between thrombotic microangiopathy and reduced ADAMTS13
activity in malignant hypertension. Hypertension. 2008;51(4):862–6.

16. Coppo P, Schwarzinger M, Buffet M, Wynckel A, Clabault K, Presne C, et al.
Predictive features of severe acquired ADAMTS13 deficiency in idiopathic
thrombotic microangiopathies: the French TMA reference center experience.
PLoS One. 2010;5(4), e10208.

17. Povey H, Vundru R, Junglee N, Jibani M. Renal recovery with eculizumab in

atypical hemolytic uremic syndrome following prolonged dialysis. Clin
Nephrol. 2014;82(5):326–31.

18. Ardissino G, Testa S, Possenti I, Tel F, Paglialonga F, Salardi S, et al.
Discontinuation of eculizumab maintenance treatment for atypical
hemolytic uremic syndrome: a report of 10 cases. Am J Kidney Dis.
2014;64(4):633–7.

Competing interests
Two of the authors, Tim Goodship and David Kavanagh, have received fees
from Alexion Pharmaceuticals for their invited lectures, whereas other
authors declare that they have no competing interests.

Authors’ contributions
DK and VB carried out the molecular genetic studies, participated in the
sequence alignment and reviewed the manuscript. DK carried out the
immunoassays. MS participated in the design of the study and performed
the statistical analysis. MS conceived of the study, participated in its design
and coordination and wrote the manuscript. All authors read and approved
the final manuscript.

Acknowledgements
DK is a Wellcome Trust intermediate clinical fellow.

Author details
1Department of Nephrology, Sisli Hamidiye Etfal Training and Education
Hospital, Halaskargazi Cad. Etfal Sok, 34371 Şişli, Istanbul, Turkey. 2Institute of
Genetic Medicine, Newcastle University, Newcastle upon Tyne, UK.

Received: 16 December 2014 Accepted: 18 March 2015

References
1.

Kavanagh D, Goodship TH, Richards A. Atypical hemolytic uremic syndrome.
Semin Nephrol. 2013;33(6):508–30.

2. Wong EK, Goodship TH, Kavanagh D. Complement therapy in atypical

haemolytic uraemic syndrome (aHUS). Mol Immunol. 2013;56(3):199–212.
Legendre CM, Licht C, Muus P, Greenbaum LA, Babu S, Bedrosian C, et al.
Terminal complement inhibitor eculizumab in atypical hemolytic-uremic
syndrome. N Engl J Med. 2013;368(23):2169–81.

3.

4. Warwicker P, Goodship TH, Donne RL, Pirson Y, Nicholls A, Ward RM, et al.

5.

6.

7.

8.

9.

10.

Genetic studies into inherited and sporadic hemolytic uremic syndrome.
Kidney Int. 1998;53(4):836–44.
Kavanagh D, Kemp EJ, Mayland E, Winney RJ, Duffield JS, Warwick G, et al.
Mutations in complement factor I predispose to development of atypical
hemolytic uremic syndrome. J Am Soc Nephrol. 2005;16(7):2150–5.
Caprioli J, Noris M, Brioschi S, Pianetti G, Castelletti F, Bettinaglio P, et al.
Genetics of HUS: the impact of MCP, CFH, and IF mutations on clinical
presentation, response to treatment, and outcome. Blood.
2006;108(4):1267–79.
Fremeaux-Bacchi V, Miller EC, Liszewski MK, Strain L, Blouin J, Brown AL,
et al. Mutations in complement C3 predispose to development of atypical
hemolytic uremic syndrome. Blood. 2008;112(13):4948–52.
Goicoechea De Jorge E, Harris CL, Esparza-Gordillo J, Carreras L, Arranz EA,
Garrido CA, et al. Gain-of-function mutations in complement factor B are
associated with atypical hemolytic uremic syndrome. Proc Natl Acad Sci
U S A. 2007;104(1):240–5.
Ferreira VP, Herbert AP, Cortes C, McKee KA, Blaum BS, Esswein ST, et al. The
binding of factor H to a complex of physiological polyanions and C3b on
cells is impaired in atypical hemolytic uremic syndrome. J Immunol.
2009;182(11):7009–18.
Fremeaux-Bacchi V, Fakhouri F, Garnier A, Bienaime F, Dragon-Durey MA,
Ngo S, et al. Genetics and outcome of atypical hemolytic uremic syndrome:
a nationwide French series comparing children and adults. Clin J Am Soc
Nephrol. 2013;8(4):554–62.

11. Noris M, Caprioli J, Bresin E, Mossali C, Pianetti G, Gamba S, et al.

Relative role of genetic complement abnormalities in sporadic and
familial aHUS and their impact on clinical phenotype. Clin J Am Soc
Nephrol. 2010;5(10):1844–59.
Fakhouri F, Roumenina L, Provot F, Sallee M, Caillard S, Couzi L, et al.
Pregnancy-associated hemolytic uremic syndrome revisited in the era of
complement gene mutations. J Am Soc Nephrol. 2010;21(5):859–67.
Salmon JE, Heuser C, Triebwasser M, Liszewski MK, Kavanagh D, Roumenina L,
et al. Mutations in complement regulatory proteins predispose to preeclampsia:
a genetic analysis of the PROMISSE cohort. PLoS Med. 2011;8(3), e1001013.
Eberhard OK, Labjuhn SO, Olbricht CJ. Ocular involvement in haemolytic
uraemic syndrome–case report and review of the literature. Nephrol Dial
Transplant. 1995;10(2):266–9.

12.

13.

14.

Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central
and take full advantage of: 

• Convenient online submission

• Thorough peer review

• No space constraints or color ﬁgure charges

• Immediate publication on acceptance

• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar

• Research which is freely available for redistribution

Submit your manuscript at 
www.biomedcentral.com/submit

