BCR-ABL1-positive chronic myeloid leukemia with 
erythrocytosis presenting as polycythemia vera: a 
case report 

Mihaela I Precup Cornea1* 
* Corresponding author 
Email: Mihaela.Precup@h-fr.ch 

Emmanuel Levrat1 
Email: Emmanuel.Levrat@h-fr.ch 

Paul Pugin1 
Email: Paul.Pugin@h-fr.ch 

Daniel C Betticher1 
Email: Daniel.Betticher@h-fr.ch 

1 Hôpital Cantonal Fribourg, Chemin des Pensionnats 2, 1708 Fribourg, 
Switzerland 

Abstract 

Introduction 

The  World  Health  Organization  classification  of  chronic  myeloproliferative  disease 
encompasses  eight  entities  of  bone  marrow  neoplasms,  among  them  Breakpoint  cluster 
region-Abelson  murine  leukemia  viral  oncogene  homolog  1-positive  chronic  myeloid 
leukemia and polycythemia vera. Polycythemia vera requires, in the majority of cases (95%), 
the negativity of Breakpoint cluster region-Abelson murine leukemia viral oncogene homolog 
1  rearrangement  and  the  presence  of  the  Janus  kinase  2  mutation.  We  report  a  case  of 
erythrocytosis as the primary manifestation of a chronic myeloid leukemia, with the presence 
of the Philadelphia chromosome and the Breakpoint cluster region-Abelson murine leukemia 
viral oncogene homolog 1 fusion gene, and in the absence of any Janus kinase 2 mutation. 

Case presentation 

A  68-year-old  Caucasian  woman,  with  a  history  of  cigarette  consumption  and  obstructive 
sleep  apnoea  syndrome  (undergoing  continuous  positive  airway  pressure  treatment)  had 
presented  to  our  institution  with  fatigue  and  a  hemoglobin  level  of  18.6g/L,  with  slight 
leukocytosis  at  16G/L,  and  no  other  anomalies  on  her  complete  blood  cell  count. 
Examination  of  her  arterial  blood  gases  found  only  a  slight  hypoxemia;  erythropoietin  and 
ferritin levels were very low and could not explain a secondary erythrocytosis. 

Further  analyses  revealed  the  absence  of  any  Janus  kinase  2  mutation,  thus  excluding 
polycythemia vera. Taken together with a high vitamin B12 level, we conducted a Breakpoint 
cluster  region-Abelson  murine  leukemia  viral  oncogene  homolog  1  gene  analysis  and  bone 

marrow  cytogenetic  analysis,  both  of  which  returned  positive,  leading  to  the  diagnosis  of 
chronic myeloid leukemia. 

Conclusions 

To  date,  this  case  is  the  first  description  of  a  Breakpoint  cluster  region-Abelson  murine 
leukemia  viral  oncogene  homolog  1-positive  chronic  myeloid  leukemia,  presenting  with 
erythrocytosis as the initial manifestation, and mimicking a Janus kinase 2 V617F-negative 
polycythemia vera. Her impressive response to imatinib therapy underscores the importance 
of not missing this diagnosis. 

Keywords 

Erythrocytosis, Polycythemia vera, Chronic myeloid leukemia, BCR-ABL1, JAK2 V617F 

Introduction 

The World Health Organization 2008 classification of myeloproliferative neoplasms (MPN) 
encompasses breakpoint cluster region-Abelson murine leukemia viral oncogene homolog 1 
(BCR-ABL1)-positive  chronic  myeloid  leukemia  (CML)  and  7  Philadelphia-negative  (Ph 
negative) MPN. 

The  BCR-ABL1  fusion  gene  is  consistently  found  in  CML.  Conversely,  Janus  kinase  2 
(JAK2) mutations, especially JAK2 V617F, are frequently encountered in Ph negative MPN, 
particularly  in  polycythemia  vera  (>95%)  [1-3],  primary  myelofibrosis  (50%)  [3],  and  in 
essential  thrombocythemia  (40  to  50%)  [1].  Other  gain  of  function  mutations  in  key 
proliferative  genes  such  as  MPL  W515K/L  and,  recently,  in  the  calreticulin  (CALR)  gene, 
have  also  been  described  in  Ph  negative  MPN  [4].  Although  Ph  negative  MPN  requires 
evidence  of  absence  of  BCR-ABL1,  CML  may  rarely  harbor  JAK2  mutations,  especially 
during evolution of the disease [4]. 

Neutrophilic leukocytosis is the initial major finding of CML, which is defined by the World 
Health Organization as a MPN that originates in an abnormal pluripotent bone marrow stem 
cell,  with  the  BCR-ABL1  fusion  gene  found  in  all  myeloid  lineages,  as  well  as  in  some 
lymphoid and endothelial cells [2,3]. 

Erythrocytosis is usually the main feature of polycythemia vera and is considered, with one 
of  the  JAK2  mutations,  as  a  major  criteria  of  this  Ph  negative  MPN.  However,  to  our 
knowledge, it has never been reported so far as a manifestation of CML. In our case report, 
we  describe  a  patient  with  isolated  erythrocytosis  as  the  sole  initial  manifestation  of  BCR-
ABL1-positive CML. 

Case presentation 

A  68-year-old  Caucasian  woman,  with  active  tabagism  (40  pack-years),  obstructive  sleep 
apnoea  syndrome  under  continuous  positive  airway  pressure  (CPAP)  via  nasal  mask,  and 
hypothyroidism  secondary  to  a  partial  thyroidectomy  in  1979,  was  investigated  by  her 
practitioner for fatigue in 2010. The current treatment at that time was aspirin 100mg per day, 

levothyroxine 100µg per day, and lorazepam 1mg per day. Her family history was negative 
for any hematologic malignancy. 

A  hemoglobin  (Hb)  level  of  177g/L  and  hematocrit  (HCT)  level  of  55%  was  found,  with 
slight leukocytosis at 12.3G/L, but there was no other abnormality found on her blood smear, 
especially no left deviation or myelemia. Therefore it was initially interpreted as secondary 
erythrocytosis. 

In  2012  a  rise  in  her  Hb  level  was  noted  and  she  was  seen  at  our  institution  for  further 
investigation.  Her  test  results  indicated  a  Hb  level  of  180g/L,  a  HCT  level  of  55%,  a 
leukocytes count of 16G/L with normal differentiation, a thrombocytes count of 294G/L, and 
a reticulocytes count of 67G/L. Her arterial blood gas levels were: partial pressure of oxygen 
in the arterial blood (PaO2) of 8.8kPa, partial pressure of carbon dioxide in the arterial blood 
(PaCO2)  of  4.7KPa,  carboxyhemoglobin  at  8.6%,  a  pH  of  7.42,  and  a  base  excess  of 
−1.2mmol/L  with  oxygen  saturation  at  95%.  Her  lactate  dehydrogenase  value  was  527U/L 
(normal  value:  <450U/L),  with  her  liver  test  results  showing  normal  function.  Her 
erythropoietin and ferritin values were low at 2.3U/L (normal value: 8 to 22U/L) and 16µg/L 
(normal  value:  30  to  300µg/L),  respectively.  In  this  context,  polycythemia  vera  was 
suspected, but could not be confirmed by molecular biology analysis as she was negative for 
the JAK2 V617F mutation. Interestingly, her vitamin B12 level was very high at 1,703pg/mL 
(normal value: 185 to 1,060pg/mL). 

Her  blood  marrow  biopsy  revealed  a  slight  hypercellularity  with  discrete  hyperplasia  and 
slight  atypia  of  megakaryopoiesis,  normal  erythropoiesis  with  discrete  signs  of 
dyserythropoiesis  without  hyperplasia,  and  normal  myelopoiesis.  These  abnormalities  were 
aspecific and not suggestive for a MPN. Based on hyperleukocytosis and a high vitamin B12 
level, we searched for the BCR-ABL1 fusion gene, which was surprisingly positive. Her bone 
marrow conventional cytogenetic analysis revealed a female karyotype with the presence of 
the Philadelphia chromosome (t (9; 22) (q34; q11.2)) in 85% of metaphases. 

An  interphase  fluorescence  in  situ  hybridization  (FISH)  analysis  confirmed  the  BCR-ABL1 
rearrangement  in  88.5%  of  interphases  analyzed.  In  light  of  these  results  we  diagnosed  a 
BCR-ABL1-positive  CML,  in  chronic  phase,  with  a  low  risk  Sokal  score  (0.62).  Given  the 
presence of the Philadelphia chromosome (t (9; 22) (q34; q11.2)), we did not search for exon 
12 mutations. 

We started a therapy of imatinib mesylate (daily dose of 400mg) on 13 April 2012, and she 
showed  relatively  good  tolerance.  Under  treatment,  she  obtained  a  complete  hematological 
response at three months, including rapid disappearance of her erythrocytosis (see Figures 1 
and 2), with complete cytogenetic response and major molecular responses being observed at 
six months (see Figure 3). These responses were considered optimal according to European 
LeukemiaNet criteria 2010 and 2013 [5]. 

Figure 1 Evolution of hemoglobin under imatinib mesylate therapy. 

Figure  2  Evolution  of  absolute  neutrophil  count  (ANC)  under  imatinib  mesylate 
therapy. 

Figure  3  Molecular  response  under  imatinib  mesylate  therapy.  BCR/ABL,  Breakpoint 
cluster region-Abelson murine leukemia viral oncogene homolog 1. 

Discussion 

In  1951,  William  Dameshek,  described  the  first  concept  of  myeloproliferative  disorders 
defining  five  entities  of  stem  cell  diseases:  CML,  polycythemia  vera,  essential 
thrombocythemia,  primary  myelofibrosis,  and  erythroleukemia  [6].  More  than  five  decades 
later,  the  revised  2008  World  Health  Organization  classification  [2]  of  MPN  encompasses 
eight  entities,  among  them  CML  harboring  the  BCR-ABL1  translocation  and  polycythemia 
vera, which both share a common stem cell-derived clonal heritage, but different phenotypes 
(leukocytosis  with  myelemia  in  CML  and  polycythemia  in  polycythemia  vera).  These 
alterations  result  from  an  abnormal  signal  transduction,  secondary  to  mutations  in  genes 
encoding tyrosine kinase proteins or related molecules (BCR-ABL1 fusion gene in CML and 
JAK2 V617F mutation in polycythemia vera) [7]. 

In polycythemia vera, polycythemia is defined  as an increased mass of red blood cells and 
can  be  evaluated  by  laboratory  findings  (Hb  or  HCT  >99th  percentile  of  method-specific 
reference range for age, sex, and altitude of residence) [2] or measurement of red cell volume 
by  radioisotopic  methods,  allowing  to  differentiate  between  true  polycythemia,  as  in 
polycythemia  vera,  chronic  obstructive  pulmonary  disease,  and  paraneoplastic  syndromes, 
and pseudoerythrocytosis found in a dehydration state, for example. 

Several diagnostic algorithms of newly diagnosed (acquired) erythrocytosis investigation are 
based  on  erythropoietin  levels  to  differentiate  between  primary  (low  erythropoietin  levels) 
with gene alterations and secondary (high erythropoietin levels) erythrocytosis. 

In  our  patient  who  smoked  and  was  diagnosed  with  sleep  apnea,  low  erythropoietin  levels 
prevented  us  from  trivializing  her  polycythemia  and  misdiagnosing  a  hypoxemia-related 
erythrocytosis. Therefore, our report here emphasizes the importance of erythropoietin level 
measurement in all polyglobulic patients. We agree with the algorithms of Tefferi et al. [3] 
and Spivak and Silver [8] recommending erythropoietin level measurement and searching for 
the JAK2 V617F mutation. 

Other  nonspecific  markers  are  helpful  in  diagnosing  MPN,  such  as  splenomegaly  (absent 
here),  high  lactate  dehydrogenase,  and  high  vitamin  B12  levels,  as  in  our  patient. 
Furthermore,  low  ferritin  levels  can  contribute  to  the  diagnosis  of  primary  polycythemia, 
reflecting high iron consumption by increased erythropoiesis. 

In  the  presence  of  primary  polycythemia,  further  investigations  are  indicated  [3]:  bone 
marrow  analysis,  showing  panmyelosis  (hypercellularity  with  tri-lineage  growth)  in 
polycythemia  vera;  bone  marrow  cytogenetic  analysis  (presence  of  the  Philadelphia 
chromosome  in  CML);  and  molecular  analysis  (presence  of  the  JAK2  V617F  mutation  in 
polycythemia vera and the BCR-ABL1 fusion gene in CML).  In fact, there have been some 
rare case reports on patients harboring both the BCR-ABL1 fusion gene, and the JAK2 V617F 
mutation. However, the co-existence of both mutations appeared during the evolution of the 
disease [9]. 

To the best of our knowledge, this is the first case reporting primary polycythemia associated 
with JAK2 V617F mutation negativity, but with the presence of the BCR-ABL1 fusion gene, 
pathognomonic of a CML diagnosis. We therefore conclude based on the low erythropoietin 
level and the BCR-ABL1 positivity, supporting the monoclonality of red stem cells, as well as 

the excellent evolution of erythrocytosis under imatinib therapy, that polycythemia without a 
high number of neutrophils may also be a feature of CML. 

Conclusions 

To the best of our knowledge, this case is the first description of a CML with erythrocytosis 
as the initial manifestation, mimicking a JAK2 V617F-negative polycythemia vera. 

In such cases we propose therefore to always test not only for the JAK2 V617F mutation or 
exon 12 mutations, but also for the BCR-ABL1 fusion transcript and to perform bone marrow 
cytogenetic analysis. 

Consent 

Written  informed  consent  was  obtained  from  the  patient  for  publication  of  this  case  report 
and any accompanying images. A copy of the written consent is available for review by the 
Editor-in-Chief of this journal. 

Abbreviations 

BCR-ABL1, Breakpoint cluster region-Abelson murine leukemia viral oncogene homolog 1; 
CALR, Calreticulin; CML, Chronic Myeloid Leukemia; Hb, Hemoglobin; HCT, Hematocrit; 
JAK2,  Janus  kinase  2;  MPN,  Myeloproliferative  Neoplasms;  PaCO2,  Partial  pressure  of 
carbon dioxide in the arterial blood; PaO2, Partial pressure of oxygen in the arterial blood. 

Competing interests 

The authors declare that they have no competing interests. 

Authors’ contributions 

MP  wrote  the  manuscript.  EL,  PP,  and  DB  participated  in  the  redaction  of  the  manuscript. 
MP,  EL,  PP,  and  DB  participated  in  the  discussion  and  decision  of  treatment  at  board 
meetings. ELS and PP have provided the clinical follow up of the patient. All authors read 
and approved the final manuscript. 

References 

1. Tefferi A, Thiele J, Orazi A, Kvasnicka HM,  Barbui T, Hanson CA, et al. Proposal and 
rationale  for  revision  of  the  WHO  diagnostic  criteria  for  polycythemiavera,  essential 
thrombocythemia, and primary myelofibrosis: recommendation from an ad hoc international 
expert panel. Blood. 2007;110:1092–6. 

2. Swerdlow SH, Campo E, Harris NL, Jaffe ES, Pileri S, Stein H, et al. WHO classification 
of  tumours  of  haematopoietic  and  lymphoid  tissues.  69008,  Lyon  France:  International 
Agency for Research on Cancer; 2008. 

3. Tefferi A, Skoda R, Vardiman JW. Myeloproliferative neoplasms: contemporary diagnosis 
using histology and genetics. Nat Rev Clin Oncol. 2009;6:627–37. 

4. Nangalia J, Massie CE, Baxter EJ, Nice FL, Gundem G, Wedge DC, et al. Somatic CALR 
mutations  in  myeloproloferative  neoplasms  with  nonmutated  JAK2.  N  Engl  J  Med. 
2013;369:2391–405. 

5.  Baccarani  M,  Deininger  MW,  Rosti  G,  Hochhaus  A,  Soverini  S,  Apperley  JF,  et  al. 
European LeukemiaNet recommendations for the management of chronic myeloid leukemia. 
Blood. 2013;122:872–80. 

6.  Dameshek  W.  Some  speculations  on 
1951;6:372–5. 

the  myeloproliferative  syndromes.  Blood. 

7. Tefferi A, Vardiman JW. Classification and diagnosis of myeloproliferative neoplasms: the 
WHO  2008  WHO  criteria  and  point-of-care  diagnostic  algorithms.  Leukemia.  2008;22:14–
22. 

8.  Spivak  JL,  Silver  R.  The  revised  World  Health  Organization  diagnostic  criteria  for 
polycythemia  vera,  essential  thrombocytosis,  and  primary  myelofibrosis:  an  alternative 
proposal. Blood. 2008;112:231–9. 

9.  Cambier  N,  Renneville  A,  Cazaentre  T,  Soenen  V,  Cossement  C,  Giraudier  S,  et  al. 
JAK2V617F-positive  polycythemia  vera  and  Philadelphia  chromosome-positive  chronic 
myeloid  leukemia:  one  patient  with  two  distinct  myeloproloferative  disorders.  Leukemia. 
2008;22:1454–5. 

Figure 1

Figure 2

Figure 3

