Kang et al. Journal of Medical Case Reports  (2015) 9:65 
DOI 10.1186/s13256-015-0545-4

JOURNAL OF MEDICAL
CASE REPORTS

CA SE R EP O R T
Open Access
High-dose methylprednisolone pulse therapy for
treatment of refractory intestinal involvement
caused by Henoch–Schönlein purpura: a case
report
Hyun Sik Kang1, Hee Sup Chung2, Ki-Soo Kang1,3 and Kyoung Hee Han1,3*

Abstract
Introduction: Henoch–Schönlein purpura is an immunoglobulin A-mediated, small vascular inflammatory disease that
can be associated with palpable purpura, arthralgia, abdominal pain, or nephritis. The presence of purpura facilitates the
diagnosis of Henoch–Schönlein purpura at the onset of associated symptoms, whereas the absence of purpura makes
the diagnosis challenging. It is important to diagnose Henoch–Schönlein purpura with delayed-onset skin purpura to
avoid unnecessary surgery for acute abdomen. Most cases of Henoch–Schönlein purpura with severe abdominal pain
are treated with low-dose steroids and intravenous immunoglobulin.
Case presentation: A 15-year-old Korean girl complained of severe abdominal pain and delayed-onset purpura on
admission. Henoch–Schönlein purpura was diagnosed based on endoscopic findings of hemorrhagic duodenitis and
duodenal vasculitis and abdominal computed tomography findings of edematous bowels. Two common initial
treatments, a low-dose steroid and intravenous immunoglobulin, were administered, but there was no improvement
for 1 month. Subsequently, we used high-dose intravenous methylprednisolone pulse therapy (30mg/kg/day, with a
maximum of 1g/day), which dramatically alleviated her abdominal symptoms.
Conclusions: High-dose intravenous methylprednisolone pulse therapy can be used as the ultimate treatment for
delayed-onset Henoch–Schönlein purpura with severe abdominal pain when symptoms do not improve after low-dose
steroid and intravenous immunoglobulin treatments.
Keywords: Duodenitis, Gastrointestinal tract, Henoch–Schönlein purpura, Methylprednisolone, Pulse therapy

Introduction
Henoch–Schönlein purpura (HSP) is one of the most
common small vascular inflammatory diseases in child-
hood that is associated with an immunoglobulin (Ig) A-
mediated autoimmune response [1]. The main clinical
symptoms of HSP, including purpura, arthralgia, abdom-
inal pain, and nephritis [2], which are associated with vas-
cular injuries of
joint areas, abdomen, and
kidneys, do not always occur simultaneously [3]. HSP can
be characterized by palpable purpura mostly over the

the skin,

* Correspondence: hansyang78@gmail.com
1Department of Pediatrics, Jeju National University Hospital, Aran 13gil 15,
Jeju-si, Jeju Special Self-Governing Province 690-767, Korea
3Department of Pediatrics, Jeju National University School of Medicine, Aran
13gil 15, Jeju-si, Jeju Special Self-Governing Province 690-767, Korea
Full list of author information is available at the end of the article

buttocks and lower extremities. Compared to other clin-
ical manifestations, palpable purpura is present in all pa-
tients with HSP [2]. HSP can be diagnosed if palpable
purpura is present with diffuse abdominal pain, any biopsy
showing predominant IgA deposition, arthritis, arthralgia,
or renal involvement [2]. Therefore, it may be difficult to
diagnose HSP based only on associated symptoms if palp-
able purpura is momentarily absent.

Intravenous Ig (IVIg) and low-dose steroids have been
used for treating HSP with gastrointestinal (GI) involve-
ment [4,5]. When HSP with GI involvement is diagnosed,
a low-dose steroid (1 to 2mg/kg/day) can be administered
initially, followed by IVIg if the symptoms persist [4].
When purpura is present, the response to these treat-
ments is favorable, except in cases of HSP with delayed-

© 2015 Kang et al.; licensee BioMed Central. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and
reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly credited. The Creative Commons Public Domain
Dedication waiver (http://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/) applies to the data made available in this article,
unless otherwise stated.

Kang et al. Journal of Medical Case Reports  (2015) 9:65 

Page 2 of 5

onset purpura [6]. Here we describe a case of delayed-
onset purpura with GI involvement in which high-dose
intravenous methylprednisolone pulse therapy (IMPT)
was effective.

Case presentation
In July 2013, a previously healthy 15-year-old Korean girl
presented with abdominal pain and bile-colored vomit-
ing, which began 6 days prior. She had poor food intake
since the onset of symptoms. Her urine output started
decreasing daily before hospital transfer. She lost ap-
proximately 6kg in a week (from 46kg to 40kg). There
was no sign of purpura. Her blood pressure (BP) was
high (130/90mmHg), heart rate was 114 beats/minute,
respiratory rate was 22 breaths/minute, and temperature
was 37.5°C. However, laboratory and urine analysis re-
sults
indicated no significant abnormalities, except
1+ proteinuria due to dehydration. On hospital day
(HD) 1, an esophagogastroduodenoscopy (EGD) was
performed, and diffuse superficial ulceration with whit-
ish membrane and mucosal bleeding was noted in the
descending and transverse portion of her duodenum
(Figure 1). A purplish and reddish mucosal edema was
indicating hemorrhagic duodenitis and
also noted,
duodenal vasculitis due to HSP.
IMPT (60mg/day,
1mg/kg/day to a maximum of 60 to 80mg/day) and
intravenous pantoprazole/ranitidine (gastric acid pump
inhibiter/H2-blocker) were administered because of diffi-
culties with oral intake. Intravenous pethidine and mor-
phine were used for pain control but were ineffective.

On HD 4, a second EGD was performed because of
worsening abdominal pain. The previous lesion had
slightly improved. However, diffuse superficial ulceration
with edematous and dark brownish mucosa was noted
in the descending and transverse portions of her duode-
num. Under the presumptive diagnosis of duodenal vas-
culitis caused by HSP, high-dose IVIg was administered
(2g/kg/day).

cytoplasmic

and anti-neutrophil

On HD 7, she experienced dyspnea and persistent ab-
dominal pain. She had an acutely ill appearance. Her BP
and temperature increased to 140/80mmHg and 38.3°C,
respectively. Her serum was negative for antinuclear
antibody
antibody.
Serum complements 3 and 4 (132mg/dL and 16mg/dL,
respectively) were within normal limits. Serum IgG, IgA,
and IgM levels were 3629mg/dL (normal range, 639
to 1349mg/dL), 162mg/dL (normal range, 70 to 312mg/
dL), and 139mg/dL (normal range, 56 to 352mg/dL), re-
spectively. Urine
revealed microscopic
hematuria. An abdominal computed tomography (CT)
scan showed an edematous bowel (Figure 2). Intraven-
ous cefotaxime was added because of her persistent high
fever and inflammation. IMPT (60mg/day) was discon-
tinued because of pancreatitis.

analysis

On HD 11, purpura developed on both of her ankles and
feet (Figure 3). Her temperature was still high (38.2°C). A
laboratory examination still showed an elevated white blood
cell count (WBC; 22,200/μL) and erythrocyte sedimenta-
tion rate (ESR; 64mm/hour). Her amylase,
lipase, and
C-reactive protein (CRP)
levels increased to 190IU/L,
210U/L, and 17.14mg/dL, respectively. Since pancreatitis
had not improved after discontinuing IMPT, we readminis-
tered low-dose IMPT (0.5mg/kg/day).

results

showed

a much

laboratory

On HD 14, her abdominal pain was aggravated, but
the purpura disappeared. She still had a fever (38.0°C).
Her
higher
WBC (34,700/μL) and a declined but abnormal ESR
(15mm/hour) and amylase (74IU/L), lipase (62U/L), and
CRP (8.16mg/dL) levels. However, her random urine
protein to creatinine ratio (UP/Cr) value of 0.41 had
slightly increased. Because of her aggravated abdominal
pain, an emergency abdominal CT scan was performed,
showing more severe bowel edema. Consequently, the
IMPT dose was increased to 1 to 2mg/kg/day, with the
addition of intravenous metronidazole. On HD 17, the
second IVIg was infused (2g/kg).

Figure 1 Esophagogastroduodenoscopy of the Henoch–Schönlein purpura-affected bowel. A) the antrum of the stomach and B) the
duodenal second portion. This image shows the descending and transverse portion of the duodenum in the patient with hemorrhagic
duodenitis and duodenal vasculitis with the additional finding of a purplish and reddish mucosal edema.

Kang et al. Journal of Medical Case Reports  (2015) 9:65 

Page 3 of 5

not intravenous, steroid (1mg/kg/day to a maximum of 60
to 80mg/day) was administered, because the patient was
able to eat. GHU and proteinuria persisted. Therefore,
enalapril was prescribed for the proteinuria (5mg daily),
and she was discharged. The oral steroid was discontinued
after 6 months, and only enalapril was continued for an
additional 2 months. Urine analysis results at the last
follow-up in April 2014 were as follows: proteins, negative;
red blood cells, 1 to 4/high-power field; and UP/Cr, 0.047.

Discussion
The patient was admitted to our hospital with upper ab-
dominal pain and bile-color vomiting. On admission,
there was no evidence of intestinal obstruction or acute
pancreatitis during the initial physical examination or on
radiographs. Therefore, EGD was performed to deter-
mine if a gastric ulcer such as HSP duodenitis was
present. Based on the EGD findings, duodenal vasculitis
due to HSP was diagnosed. It is not rare for a patient
with HSP to present with skin purpura prior to having
abdominal symptoms. However, in our case, HSP was
associated with delayed-onset purpura and GI involve-
ment at disease onset. Approximately 14 to 36% of cases
of HSP show GI involvement with delayed-onset of pur-
pura [3]. Therefore,
if a patient complains of severe
upper epigastric pain, duodenitis due to HSP must be
considered even though skin purpura may be absent.

Treatment for HSP is controversial. Although in some
cases the symptoms may resolve without any therapy,
corticosteroids and IVIg have been used in patients with
HSP with severe GI involvement as standard and alter-
native therapy, respectively [4,5]. In this case, the patient
complained of repeated severe abdominal pain accom-
panied by abdominal distention, dyspnea, fever, and pan-
creatitis. The symptoms did not resolve even after
administering twice the amount of
low-dose steroid
treatments, followed by twice the amount of IVIg injec-
tions. Severe edema of her small intestine was also ob-
served on CT. The efficacy of double IVIg injections in
most cases of refractory intestinal involvement by HSP
is unknown; however, it did not work in our case.

IMPT may aggravate pancreatitis. However, serial
changes of amylase/lipase worsened even after discon-
tinuing the steroid. Thus, pancreatitis was not induced
by IMPT. Furthermore, in most cases, HSP would be ac-
companied by pancreatitis. We considered that pancrea-
titis was a complication of uncontrolled HSP.

Studies have reported that high-dose IMPT is rarely
used to stop the progression of nephropathy in cases of
HSP nephritis with a severe crescent on renal biopsy [8].
However, a few case reports have suggested high-dose
IMPT for HSP with GI involvement [6]. In this case,
renal biopsy was performed because of the GHU on HD
20. Even though the biopsy
renal

showed that

Figure 2 Computed tomography of the abdomen showing an
edematous bowel. This image shows multifocal areas of bowel wall
thickening, mesenteric edema, and vascular engorgement in jejuno-ileal
loops (yellow arrows).

On HD 20, her fever and abdominal pain persisted,
and gross hematuria (GHU) developed. Laboratory re-
sults showed the following abnormalities: WBC count,
23,600/μL; ESR, 67mm/hour; amylase, 125IU/dL; lipase,
104U/L; and CRP, 6.41mg/dL. The random UP/Cr had
elevated to 2.15. The antibiotic was switched to pipera-
cillin and tazobactam to eradicate the infection. A kid-
ney biopsy was performed. Finally, a decision was made
to administer high-dose IMPT for 3 days consecutively.
The renal biopsy showed an increased glomerulus size,
segment hypercellularity, 9% segmental loop necrosis on
light microscopy, mesangial deposits on electron micros-
copy, and IgA 3+ on immunofluorescence microscopy.
Overall, the biopsy revealed grade II HSP nephritis ac-
cording to the International Study of Kidney Disease in
Children grading system [7], and HSP nephritis was con-
firmed (Figure 4).

After the course of high-dose IMPT, her abdominal pain
and fever dramatically disappeared. On HD 30, an oral,

Figure 3 Palpable purpura on both of the patient’s ankles and
feet on hospital day 11.

Kang et al. Journal of Medical Case Reports  (2015) 9:65 

Page 4 of 5

Figure 4 Kidney involvement of Henoch–Schönlein purpura. The biopsy reveals 9% segmental loop necrosis. A) Polymorphonuclear cell
infiltration and B) segmental mesangial proliferation. C) Periodic acid–Schiff stain with hematoxylin and eosin stain, ×400. D) The mesangial
deposit is observed on electron microscopy. E) The immunoglobulin A deposit is 3+ on immunofluorescence microscopy. Overall, grade II
Henoch-Schönlein purpura nephritis is diagnosed based on the International Study of Kidney Disease in Children grading system [7].

involvement was not as serious as assumed by the severe
abdominal symptoms, high-dose IMPT was performed
because the two standard treatments failed. After admin-
istering high-dose IMPT, her fever continued for 2
weeks while severe abdominal pain and whole body dis-
comfort disappeared. Since she was able to eat inde-
pendently,
intravenous nutrition was discontinued.
Therefore, all of the abdominal symptoms recovered
simultaneously with high-dose IMPT.

In our case, a high serum level of IgG was noted.
However, it was assumed that this elevation was because
IVIg was the previous initial treatment.

Besides, it is more important to recognize that severe
abdominal symptoms (bloody stool) and persistent pur-
pura for >1 month are risk factors for renal involvement
[9]. In this case, GI symptoms were severe, with less in-
volvement of
the kidneys. When GI symptoms are
severe, the possibility of another disease (for example,
Crohn’s disease, ulcerative colitis, microscopic polyangii-
tis, or Wegener’s granulomatosis), which are capable of
mimicking HSP, should be ruled out [10-13].

A low level of factor XIII activity correlates with the
severity of HSP’s clinical manifestations, particularly ab-
dominal pain and GI bleeding [14,15]. In our case, we
could not quantitatively determine the factor XIII level.
One study suggested that the administration of factor
XIII may be useful in the rapid improvement of severe
abdominal pain and GI bleeding [15].

Conclusions
High-dose IMPT can be used as the ultimate treatment
for delayed-onset HSP with severe abdominal pain when
symptoms do not improve after administering low-dose
steroid and IVIg treatments.

Consent
Written informed consent was obtained from the patient’s
father for the publication of this case report and any ac-
companying images. Upon request, a copy of the written
consent is available for review by the Editor-in-Chief of
this journal.

Kang et al. Journal of Medical Case Reports  (2015) 9:65 

Page 5 of 5

12.

Leavitt RY, Fauci AS. Polyangiitis overlap syndrome. Classification and
prospective clinical experience. Am J Med. 1986;81:79–85.

14.

13. Bui T, Chandrakasan S, Poulik J, Fathalla BM. Granulomatosis with
polyangiitis presenting as Henoch-Schönlein purpura in children.
J Clin Rheumatol. 2013;19:199–202.
Ebert EC. Gastrointestinal manifestations of Henoch-Schonlein purpura.
Dig Dis Sci. 2008;53:2011–9.
Fukui H, Kamitsuji H, Nagao T, Yamada K, Akatsuka J, Inagaki M, et al. Clinical
evaluation of a pasteurized factor XIII concentrate administration in
Henoch-Schönlein purpura. Thromb Res. 1989;56:667–75.

15.

Abbreviations
BP: Blood pressure; CRP: C-reactive protein; CT: Computed tomography;
EGD: Esophagogastroduodenoscopy; ESR: Erythrocyte sedimentation rate;
GHU: Gross hematuria; GI: Gastrointestinal; HD: Hospital day; HSP:
Henoch–Schönlein purpura; Ig: Immunoglobulin; IMPT: Intravenous
methylprednisolone pulse therapy; IVIg: Intravenous immunoglobulin;
UP/Cr: Urine protein to creatinine ratio; WBC: White blood cell count.

Competing interests
The authors declare that they have no competing interests.

Authors’ contributions
HSK and HSC contributed equally to this work and were the major
contributors to the manuscript writing process. KK helped write and edit the
manuscript. KHH, the corresponding author, helped draft, write, edit, and
review the manuscript. All authors read and approved the final manuscript.

Acknowledgements
The authors have no relevant affiliations or financial involvement with any
organization or entity with a financial interest in or financial conflict with the
subject matter or materials discussed in the manuscript. This includes
employment, consultancies, honoraria, stock ownership or options, expert
testimony, grants or patents received or pending, or royalties.
No writing assistance was utilized in the production of this manuscript.

Author details
1Department of Pediatrics, Jeju National University Hospital, Aran 13gil 15,
Jeju-si, Jeju Special Self-Governing Province 690-767, Korea. 2Jeju National
University School of Medicine, Aran 13gil 15, Jeju-si, Jeju Special
Self-Governing Province 690-767, Korea. 3Department of Pediatrics, Jeju
National University School of Medicine, Aran 13gil 15, Jeju-si, Jeju Special
Self-Governing Province 690-767, Korea.

Received: 7 October 2014 Accepted: 13 February 2015

References
1.

Ardoin ST, Fels E. Vasculitis syndromes. In: Kliegman RM, Stanton BF,
St-Geme JW, Schor NF, Behrman RE, editors. Nelson textbook of pediatrics.
19th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier Saunders; 2011. p. 868–71.
Ozen S, Pistorio A, Iusan SM, Bakkaloglu A, Herlin T, Brik R, et al. Paediatric
Rheumatology International Trials Organisation (PRINTO). EULAR/PRINTO/
PRES criteria for Henoch-Schönlein purpura, childhood polyarteritis nodosa,
childhood Wegener granulomatosis and childhood Takayasu arteritis: Ankara
2008. Part II: Final classification criteria. Ann Rheum Dis. 2010;69:798–806.
Choong CK, Beasley SW. Intra-abdominal manifestations of Henoch-Schönlein
purpura. J Paediatr Child Health. 1998;34:405–9.
Yang HR, Choi WJ, Ko JS, Seo JK. Intravenous immunoglobulin for severe
gastrointestinal manifestation of Henoch-Schönlein purpura refractory to
corticosteroid therapy. Korean J Pediatr. 2006;49:784–9.

2.

3.

4.

5. Weiss PF, Feinstein JA, Luan X, Burnham JM, Feudtner C. Effects of
corticosteroid on Henoch-Schönlein purpura: a systematic review.
Pediatrics. 2007;120:1079–87.

7.

8.

6. Wang L, Huang FC, Ko SF, Cheng MT. Successful treatment of mesenteric
vasculitis caused by Henoch-Schönlein purpura with methylprednisolone
pulse therapy. Clin Rheumatol. 2003;22:140–2.
Counahan R, Winterborn MH, White RH, Heaton JM, Meadow SR, Bluett NH,
et al. Prognosis of Henoch-Schonlein nephritis in children. Br Med J.
1977;2:11–4.
Niaudet P, Habib R. Methylprednisolone pulse therapy in the treatment of
severe forms of Schönlein-Henoch purpura nephritis. Pediatr Nephrol.
1998;12:238–43.
Kaku Y, Nohara K, Honda S. Renal involvement in Henoch-Schönlein
purpura: a multivariate analysis of prognostic factors. Kidney Int.
1998;53:1755–9.
Saulsbury FT, Hart MH. Crohn’s disease presenting with Henoch-Schönlein
purpura. J Pediatr Gastroenterol Nutr. 2000;31:173–5.

10.

9.

11. de Oliveira GT, Martins SS, Deboni M, Picciarelli P, Campos LM, Jesus AA,

et al. Cutaneous vasculitis in ulcerative colitis mimicking Henoch-Schönlein
purpura. J Crohns Colitis. 2013;7:e69–73.

Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central
and take full advantage of: 

• Convenient online submission

• Thorough peer review

• No space constraints or color ﬁgure charges

• Immediate publication on acceptance

• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar

• Research which is freely available for redistribution

Submit your manuscript at 
www.biomedcentral.com/submit

