Erdal et al. Journal of Medical Case Reports  (2015) 9:57 
DOI 10.1186/s13256-015-0532-9

JOURNAL OF MEDICAL
CASE REPORTS

Open Access

CA SE R EP O R T
Esophagus perforation and myocardial
penetration caused by swallowing of a foreign
body leading to a misdiagnosis of acute coronary
syndrome: a case report
Uysal Erdal1*, Dokur Mehmet2, Kirdak Turkay3, Ikidag A Mehmet4, Nacak Ibrahim5 and Bakir Hasan6

Abstract

Introduction: Here we present our clinical experience in a case of esophagus perforation due to the swallowing of
a bone piece causing acute angina pectoris and leading to misdiagnosis of acute coronary syndrome.
Case presentation: A 73-year-old Caucasian man underwent urgent coronary angiography with possible diagnosis
of acute coronary syndrome. His coronary arteries were found to be normal. A computed tomography examination
revealed esophagus perforation by a foreign body (a piece of bone), and he underwent urgent left thoracotomy
and the foreign body was removed.
Conclusions: Sometimes, even a piece of bone within a meal can lead to esophagus perforation, and injure the
pericardium and myocardium. The symptoms of esophagus perforation may be confused with acute coronary
syndrome due to their similarities and lack of knowledge about the detailed clinical history as shown in our case.
Thus, careful consideration of detailed clinical history as well as choosing an appropriate medical imaging modality,
such as computed tomography, should always be kept in mind in order to promptly diagnose and start early
treatment to reduce mortality.
Keywords: Acute coronary syndrome, Esophagus perforation, Foreign body

Introduction
Esophagus foreign bodies are mostly encountered in
childhood. Although they are rarely seen in adults, the
rate of mortality and morbidity is high in cases of perfor-
ation. Most esophagus perforations are iatrogenic [1].
Perforations due to foreign bodies are rare, and compli-
cations are mostly encountered with sharp-edged objects
[2]. Foreign bodies in the esophagus should be removed
immediately because of the risk of complications [3]. A
few cases of cardiac tamponade due to esophagus perfor-
ation have been reported, but the symptoms were not
confused with acute coronary syndrome [2,3]. Esophagus
perforation should be kept in mind in patients referring
with acute chest pain. Although clinical history and

* Correspondence: drerdaluysal@hotmail.com
1Department of General Surgery and Transplantation Center, Sanko
University Hospital, Gaziantep, Turkey
Full list of author information is available at the end of the article

radiological evaluation are usually sufficient for the diag-
nosis, computed tomography (CT) is the most sensitive
diagnostic modality. Patients may refer with shortness of
breath and chest pain. Prompt diagnosis and early treat-
ment are important in preventing high mortality and
morbidity rate in cases of esophagus perforation [4].
Early surgery should be the first treatment choice. Here
we present our clinical experience in a case of esophagus
perforation due to swallowing of a bone piece causing
acute angina pectoris and leading to misdiagnosis of
acute coronary syndrome.

Case presentation
A 73-year-old Caucasian man was referred to another
health care center with complaints of severe chest pain
and palpitation that had started immediately after he
had eaten his dinner. He underwent urgent coronary
angiography with possible diagnosis of acute coronary

© 2015 Erdal et al.; licensee BioMed Central. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and
reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly credited. The Creative Commons Public Domain
Dedication waiver (http://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/) applies to the data made available in this article,
unless otherwise stated.

Erdal et al. Journal of Medical Case Reports  (2015) 9:57 

Page 2 of 3

syndrome. His coronary arteries were found to be nor-
mal. Since his symptoms were partially relieved, he was
discharged. He was referred to our hospital 3 days later,
with aggravation of the same complaints. On admission,
his abdominal physical examination was normal except
for mild epigastric tenderness. His respiratory sounds
were diminished in his left lower hemithorax. His pulse
rate was 112/minute and blood pressure was 90/
50mmHg. His body temperature was 37.5°C. He had
sinus rhythm in electrocardiography (ECG). A hemo-
gram and biochemical test results were as follows: white
blood cell count 17,280/mm3 (4.8 to 10.8mm3), urea
65mg/dL (5 to 23mg/dL), creatinine 4.2mg/dL (0.6 to
1.3mg/dL), total bilirubin 3.5mg/dL (0.2 to 1.2mg/dL),
gamma-glutamyl transpeptidase 78U/L (12 to 64U/L),
aspartate transaminase 105U/L (5 to 34U/L), alanine
transaminase 118U/L (0 to 55U/L), and C-reactive pro-
tein 314mg/dL (0.0 to 5.0 mg/dL). A CT examination
was performed to exclude aortic aneurysm or dissection.
There was pleural fluid in both sides; an air bubble con-
taining pericardial fluid reaching to 2cm thickness was
noted. There was minimal free fluid in perihepatic, peri-
splenic and retrovesical spaces. With these findings and
clinical situation, severe mediastinitis was considered,
and his detailed clinical history was taken into consider-
ation once again. The patient later told that he had eaten
chopsteak (meat on the bone) in his dinner just before
the onset of his symptoms. Then the CT images were
checked again, and a dense 2cm-long linear foreign body
was found in the posterior aspect of his left atrium
(Figure 1).

These findings revealed a perforation of esophagus by
a foreign body, and the patient underwent urgent left

thoracotomy. At surgery, a sharp contoured piece of
bone was found, perforating the 1/3 distal aspect of the
posterior wall of his esophagus. It reached to the pericar-
dium, penetrating it and eroding his left atrium. The ad-
ventitia of the aorta was affected on the left. There was
pus in his pericardium. The foreign body was removed
(Figure 2). After abundant serum irrigation, his esopha-
gus was repaired by primary sutures, and pleura was at-
tached on the defect side and supported by tissue
adhesives. Finally, a percutaneous jejunostomy was per-
formed for feeding by laparotomy. Parenteral broad
spectrum antibiotic therapy and feeding from the jeju-
nostomy was started. No postoperative complication was
observed, and the patient was discharged from our hos-
pital on the 15th day. After 3 days, he was readmitted
and hospitalized again with the complaints of fever and
weakness. Contrast extravasation from the primary su-
ture zone was found in a CT examination, then he
underwent endoscopic stent placement. His clinical con-
dition deteriorated rapidly due to mediastinitis and he
died because of sepsis and multiorgan failure.

Discussion
Esophagus perforations due to foreign bodies have high
mortality and morbidity rates. Diagnosis can be made by
detailed clinical history, physical examination and CT.
Immediate diagnosis and early treatment are important
in preventing high mortality and morbidity in a case of
esophagus perforation. The treatment depends on pre-
venting and controlling sepsis and infection, and main-
taining the continuity of digestive tract and nutrition.
While early intervention performed within the first 24
hours of injury offers favorable outcomes, delayed sur-
gery has increased mortality and morbidity rates [4]. In
our case, his first complaints were confused with acute
coronary syndrome in the previous hospital; therefore,
the patient underwent coronary angiography. He was

Figure 1 Findings of esophageal perforation by foreign body
on computed tomography. Abbreviations: FB, Foreign body; Per.
Eff., Pericardial effusion; Pl. Eff., Pleural effusion.

Figure 2 Surgically removed bone fragment.

Erdal et al. Journal of Medical Case Reports  (2015) 9:57 

Page 3 of 3

discharged because of normal findings in coronary angi-
ography and partial relief of chest pain. The aggravation
of his chest pain and his admission to our hospital took
3 days. The main reason for his mortality may be due to
this delayed diagnosis and treatment. It is crucial that a
clinician inform the radiologist about a patient’s clinical
history and situation to establish a rapid and true radio-
logical diagnosis. In our patient, although mediastinitis
was diagnosed, the radiologist did not indicate the eti-
ology in the lack of clinical history. After sufficient infor-
mation, he revisited the CT and was able to demonstrate
the bone piece and set the diagnosis of esophagus per-
foration. In our case, the most prominent cardiac symp-
toms including chest pain and palpitation were due to
the perforation of esophagus and pericardium, and close
relation of the bone piece to the left atrium and aorta.
There was no sign of arrhythmia in the preoperative
ECG. In cases of esophagus perforations or foreign bod-
ies, a right or left thoracotomy decision is made accord-
ing to the level of esophageal disease. While right
intercostal
for 2/3
proximal esophagus
thoracotomy
should be performed for 1/3 distal lesions. There is a
publication that suggests the benefits of strengthening
the defect or wound by pleural, pericardial or intercostal
muscle patch grafts in addition to primary suturing [5].
Mediastinal pleural space must be debrided and irrigated
and drainage is also important [5]. In our case, we pre-
ferred primary repair which was supported by pleural
autograft. Despite developments in diagnosis and treat-
ment of esophagus perforations, mortality rates still re-
main above 20% [6]. If there is no delay in diagnosis, the
patient might survive.

thoracotomy is more convenient

lower

lesions,

left

Abbreviations
CT: Computed tomography; ECG: Electrocardiography.

Competing interests
The authors declare that they have no competing interests.

Authors’ contributions
UE helped in acquisition of data and preparation of the first draft; UE, DM
and KT were responsible for conception of the idea, overall preparation and
revision of the manuscript; NI and IAM and BH were responsible for
management of the patient and revising the manuscript for important
intellectual content. All authors read and approved the final manuscript.

Author details
1Department of General Surgery and Transplantation Center, Sanko
University Hospital, Gaziantep, Turkey. 2Sanko University Hospital,
Department of Emergency, Gaziantep, Turkey. 3Uludag University School of
Medicine, Department of General Surgery, Bursa, Turkey. 4Department of
Radiology, Sanko University Hospital Gaziantep, Gaziantep, Turkey. 5Sanko
University Hospital, Department of Thoracic Surgery, Gaziantep, Turkey.
6Department of General Surgery, Sanko University Hospital, Gaziantep,
Turkey.

Received: 25 November 2014 Accepted: 27 January 2015

References
1.

Basagiannis C, Spartalis E, Karagkiouzis G, Panagoulias G, Tomos P.
Successful surgical management of severe mediastinitis caused by a
perforating esophageal foreign body. Hippokratia. 2012;16:93.
Sharland MG, McCaughan BC. Perforation of the esophagus by a fish bone
leading to cardiac tamponade. Ann Thorac Surg. 1993;56:969–71.
Caplin JL, Franks R, Poole-Wilson PA. An unusual traumatic cause of cardiac
tamponade and mitral regurgitation. Clin Cardiol. 1984;7:109–11.
Shaker H, Elsayed H, Whittle I, Hussein S, Shackcloth M. The influence of the
‘golden 24-h rule’ on the prognosis of esophageal perforation in the mod-
ern era. Eur J Cardiothorac Surg. 2010;38:216–22.
Byaruhanga R, Kakande E, Mwambu T. A rare case of a patient with a
foreign body in the esophagus for two years which perforated into the
mediastinum. Afr Health Sci. 2012;12:569–71.
Chirica M, Champault A, Dray X, Sulpice L, Munoz-Bongrand N, Sarfati E,
et al. Esophageal perforations. J Visc Surg. 2010;147:117–28.

2.

3.

4.

5.

6.

Conclusions
Sometimes, a piece of bone can cause esophagus perfor-
ation and injure the pericardium and myocardium. Lack
of knowledge of detailed clinical history may cause con-
fusion because of the similarity between the symptoms
of acute coronary syndrome and those of esophagus per-
foration. Because of this, the patient’s detailed clinical
history should always be checked and an appropriate
medical imaging technique (that is, CT) chosen. Early
proper diagnosis and treatment may reduce the mortal-
ity rate.

Consent
Written informed consent was obtained from the pa-
tient’s next of kin for publication of this case report and
any accompanying images. A copy of the written consent
is available for review by the Editor-in-Chief of this
journal.

Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central
and take full advantage of: 

• Convenient online submission

• Thorough peer review

• No space constraints or color ﬁgure charges

• Immediate publication on acceptance

• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar

• Research which is freely available for redistribution

Submit your manuscript at 
www.biomedcentral.com/submit

