Prifti et al. Journal of Medical Case Reports  (2015) 9:55 
DOI 10.1186/s13256-015-0540-9

JOURNAL OF MEDICAL
CASE REPORTS

CA SE R EP O R T
Coil embolization of an anomalous bronchial
artery originating from the left subclavian artery
following arterial switch operation: a case report
Edvin Prifti1, Fadil Ademaj2*, Arben Baboci1, Efrosina Kajo1 and Vittorio Vanini3

Open Access

Abstract

Introduction: Bronchial arteries originate from the descending aorta at the level of the T5-T6 vertebrae following
an intrapulmonary course along the major bronchi. When bronchial arteries take off from a vessel other than the
descending aorta, the anatomy is defined as an anomalous origin of the bronchial artery.
Case presentation: A 3-day-old boy from Kosovo with dextro-transposition of the great arteries who developed
progressive heart failure required an emergency arterial switch operation. Because of persistent pulmonary edema
after completion of the arterial switch operation at our institution, the patient could not be weaned off mechanical
ventilation. Transthoracic echocardiography revealed an anomalous accelerated flow, indicating an anomalous
systemic pulmonary shunt. Arterial catheterization revealed an abnormal bronchial artery originating from the left
subclavian artery and bifurcating to both lungs. The anomalous ectatic bronchial artery was successfully occluded
by coil embolization. The improvement of the patient’s hemodynamic status resulted in an uneventful
post-operative course.
Conclusion: A coil embolization procedure was successfully performed to treat an anomalous bronchial artery
originating from the left subclavian artery after a switch operation in a patient with transposition of the great
arteries. When clinically indicated, catheter-based therapy with coil embolization can be performed to successfully
treat anomalous bronchial arteries by reducing as such the pulmonary overflow.
Keywords: Anomalous bronchial artery, Arterial switch operation, Coil embolization, Transposition of the great
arteries

Introduction
Bronchial arteries (BAs) normally originate from the de-
scending thoracic aorta at the level of the T5-T6 vertebrae
with an intrapulmonary course along the major bronchi
[1]. Anomalous origin of a BA is defined as a vessel that
arises outside these areas [2]. These arteries can be identi-
fied in the fetus as early as 9 weeks of gestational age, and
they are usually quite small and hemodynamically insig-
nificant. In 1863, Cockle [3] described the first case in the
literature of enlarged BA in association with transposition
of the great arteries (TGAs) discovered in a patient post-
mortem. These vessels have been implicated in the patho-
genesis of accelerated pulmonary vascular disease, and, in

* Correspondence: fadilademaj-kosove@hotmail.com
2Heart Disease Department, Gjakova Hospital, Rr Prizren, Gjakove, Kosovo
Full list of author information is available at the end of the article

some cases, they may produce a volume overload to the
systemic ventricle. In this report, we describe a case of a
pediatric patient with dextro-TGA (d-TGA) of anomalous
BA origin and distribution who developed hypoxemia, car-
diac insufficiency and pulmonary edema after undergoing
an arterial switch operation (ASO). He was successfully
treated using a coil embolization procedure to close the
anomalous BA.

Case presentation
A 3-day-old boy from Kosovo, weighing 2.4kg, was ad-
mitted to our hospital with severe dyspnea and cyanosis.
Transthoracic echocardiography revealed d-TGA with
intact ventricular septum, left aortic arch and a 4mm pa-
tent ductus arteriosus. Medical therapy with prostaglan-
din E1, dopamine, oxygen and antibiotics was initiated.
The following day, owing to hemodynamic instability,

© 2015 Prifti et al.; licensee BioMed Central. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and
reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly credited. The Creative Commons Public Domain
Dedication waiver (http://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/) applies to the data made available in this article,
unless otherwise stated.

Prifti et al. Journal of Medical Case Reports  (2015) 9:55 

Page 2 of 4

urgent corrective cardiac surgery was necessitated. The
intra-operative findings included the following. The
sinus 2, according to the Leiden convention [4], pre-
sented two coronary ostia: one giving off a branch as the
right coronary artery, and the other one originating at a
long left main coronary trunk and passing directly back-
ward in close relation to the pulmonary artery, then
curving around its posterior aspect to reach the atrioven-
tricular groove, from whence it bifurcated into the left an-
terior descending and circumflex arteries. An additional
branch originated from sinus 1 as a conal branch, giving
rise to the septal branches. Translocation of the coronary
arteries was performed. The new pulmonary trunk was
reconstructed to avoid compression of the coronary artery
and distortion of the great arteries. Immediately after
surgery, the patient was unstable hemodynamically, as
demonstrated by left ventricular (LV) failure and persistent
pulmonary edema requiring inotropic support and mech-
anical ventilation. Transthoracic echocardiography re-
vealed the presence of an anomalous accelerated Doppler
flow localized at the left side of the heart, precisely at the
aortic arch level. This Doppler image gave rise to our sus-
picion of an anomalous shunt between the systemic and
pulmonary circulation. The hemodynamic study demon-
strated a unique supra-aortic anomalous vessel originating
from the left subclavian artery. The anteroposterior pro-
jection demonstrated an anomalous vessel originating
from the inferior wall of the left subclavian artery, from
whence it divided into two branches supplying both lungs
as BAs (Figure 1). The anomalous BA originating from the
left subclavian artery was the principal cause of a pulmon-
ary hyperperfusion with consequent pulmonary edema

and congestive heart failure. There were no BA originat-
ing from the T5-T6 segments. The anomalous vessel
was successfully occluded proximally to its bifurcation
in the catheterization laboratory with a 5-French catheter
(Terumo Europe, Leuven, Belgium) and two Gianturco
coils 3×3-French (William Cook Europe, Bjæverskov,
Denmark) inserted through the left subclavian artery
(Figure 2). The closure of this anomalous systemic pul-
monary communication was associated with significant
improvement of the hemodynamic and clinical status
of the newborn, permitting successful extubation and
decrease of the inotropic support. The patient’s post-
operative course was uneventful, and the baby was dis-
charged to home 30 days later in excellent clinical
condition.

Discussion
The most common complications after an ASO are the
supravalvular pulmonary stenosis, neoaortic valve dys-
function and myocardial ischemia related to coronary ar-
tery translocation [5,6], such as obstruction of coronary
arteries commonly caused by the development of fibrous
tissue at the coronary button suture lines or vessel
“kinking” secondary to an imperfect arterial transloca-
tion [7]. Several other factors can complicate the post-
operative course, such as the presence of abnormal and
enlarged BAs, which is associated with increased pul-
monary blood flow and LV load as well as a low survival
rate [8].

Hypoxemic respiratory failure happens as a result of
atelectasis,
infection, pulmonary immaturity or surfactant
deficiency, pulmonary hypertension and ventilation/perfusion

Figure 1 The arrow indicates an abnormal bronchial artery
arising from the inferior wall of the left subclavian artery, from
which it divides into two branches that give flow to both lungs
as bronchial arteries.

Figure 2 The arrow indicates the successful closure with coil
embolization of the abnormal bronchial artery before its
bifurcation.

Prifti et al. Journal of Medical Case Reports  (2015) 9:55 

Page 3 of 4

mismatch. The presence of a left-to-right shunt due to
enlarged BAs might be another cause of respiratory failure
[9]. In patients with TGA undergoing ASO, the lungs are
congested because of increased blood flow through these
collateral arteries, which causes pulmonary edema and
congestive heart failure.

About half of patients with TGA undergoing ASO
present with anomalous bronchial collateral arteries
detected during post-operative cardiac catheterization
studies [8]. Flow through these BAs is trivial to mild
in the majority of patients and appears to be of no
hemodynamic significance, but a few patients have
significant LV volume load due to enlarged BAs [8].
Evidence of cardiomegaly, congestive heart failure due
to increased LV end-diastolic pressure and pulmonary
arterial hypertension following ASO may indicate an
increased pulmonary blood flow. Such a condition
should be differentiated from other causes of LV failure
after ASO, such as myocardial ischemia or infarction
due to coronary obstruction after the translocation,
neoaortic valve insufficiency or myocardial protection
during surgery [5].

Abnormally enlarged BAs might not be diagnosed in
patients with simple TGA, as pre-operative angiography
is rarely performed. Unexplained pulmonary hypoxemia
with pulmonary hypercirculation after ASO could be
an indicator of anomalous enlarged BAs. Post-operative
cardiac catheterization permits the clinician to visualize
the pulmonary veins and left atrium after injection
of contrast medium into the aorta. The presence of
enlarged BAs should be differentiated from the major
aortopulmonary collateral arteries (MAPCAs), which
supply blood to the lungs when the native pulmonary
circulation is underdeveloped, which carries a patho-
physiology different from simple TGA. The MAPCAs’
sites of origin are from the descending aorta (70% of
cases), aortic arch (15% to 20% of cases) and ascending
aorta (10% to 15% of cases) [10].

Previous studies have documented enlarged BAs in
patients with TGA [6,9]; however, significant bronchial
collateral arteries complicating early post-operative
recovery following neonatal ASO are extremely rare.
Irving and colleagues [9] presented a case of a patient
with enlarged BA complicating the early post-operative
course after an ASO in a newborn, requiring coil
embolization.

The most interesting finding in our patient was the
anomalous origin of a single-trunk BA originating from
the left subclavian artery that furnished both lungs sim-
ultaneously. Such an abnormality is scarcely reported in
the literature [11,12] and has never been reported in
combination with the TGA. Sancho et al. [2] demon-
strated that 27 (8.3%) patients had an anomalous origin
of BA in a series of 300 BAs undergoing embolization,

and in only one did it originate from the right subclavian
artery. Other anomalous origins are the aortic arch, thyr-
ocervical trunk, lower descending thoracic aorta, costo-
cervical trunk, brachiocephalic artery, pericardiophrenic
artery, inferior phrenic artery, abdominal aorta and cor-
onary artery [13].

Late surgical

ligation or coil embolization of these
collateral arteries has been reported following ASO
[14]. Although the experience is very limited, the coil
embolization procedure leads to excellent outcomes in
this case [2,9,15]. Coil embolization has been employed
successfully even in cases with an anomalous origin of
the BA from the right subclavian artery [12], but until
now it has not been reported in association with TGA.
This case report demonstrates that such intervention
after ASO is feasible and offers the prospect of an excel-
lent outcome, even when the BA originates abnormally
from the left subclavian artery.

Conclusions
In this report, we describe a case of a pediatric patient
with a combination of an anomalous BA originating
from the left subclavian artery and TGA, whom we
treated successfully with coil embolization. Catheter-
based therapy with coil embolization can be performed
with good results when clinically indicated, reducing
pulmonary overperfusion and avoiding the risks of a
surgical procedure.

Consent
Written informed consent was obtained from the
patient's legal guardian for publication of this case report
and any accompanying images. A copy of the written
consent is available for review by the Editor-in-Chief of
this journal.

Abbreviations
ASO: Arterial switch operation; BA: Bronchial artery; LV: Left ventricular;
MAPCA: Major aortopulmonary collateral artery; TGA: Transposition of the
great arteries.

Competing interests
The authors declare that they have no competing interests.

Authors’ contributions
EP and AB performed the surgery. EK performed the diagnosis. FA and VV
performed the embolization procedure. FA and EP wrote the manuscript
and reviewed the literature. All authors read and approved the final
manuscript.

Acknowledgments
We acknowledge Dr. Luigi Ballerini for his support regarding the treatment
of the patient. We thank Dr. Lindita Coku for English proofreading.

Author details
1Cardiac Surgery Department, Tirana University Medical Center, Tirana,
Albania. 2Heart Disease Department, Gjakova Hospital, Rr Prizren, Gjakove,
Kosovo. 3Children’s Heart Foundation, Bergamo, Italy.

Prifti et al. Journal of Medical Case Reports  (2015) 9:55 

Page 4 of 4

Received: 28 October 2014 Accepted: 30 January 2015

References
1.

Chung MJ, Lee JH, Lee KS, Yoon YC, Kwon OJ, Kim TS. Bronchial and
nonbronchial systemic arteries in patients with hemoptysis: depiction on
MDCT angiography. AJR Am J Roentgenol. 2006;186:649–55.
Sancho C, Escalante E, Domínguez J, Vidal J, Lopez E, Valldeperas J, et al.
Embolization of bronchial arteries of anomalous origin. Cardiovasc Intervent
Radiol. 1998;21:300–4.
Cockle J. A case of transposition of the great vessels of the heart. Med Chir
Trans. 1863;46:193–209.

2.

3.

4. Wilcox BR, Anderson RH. Surgical anatomy of the heart. 2nd ed. London:

5.

6.

7.

Gower; 1992. p. 819.
Prifti E, Crucean A, Bonacchi M, Bernabei M, Murzi B, Luisi SV, et al. Early and
long term outcome of the arterial switch operation for transposition of the
great arteries: predictors and functional evaluation. Eur J Cardiothorac Surg.
2002;22:864–73.
Lim HG, Kim WH, Lee JR, Kim YJ. Long-term results of the arterial switch
operation for ventriculo-arterial discordance. Eur J Cardiothorac Surg.
2013;43:325–34.
Prifti E, Bonacchi M, Luisi SV, Vanini V. Coronary revascularization after
arterial switch operation. Eur J Cardiothorac Surg. 2002;21:111–3.

9.

8. Wernovsky G, Bridges ND, Mandell VS, Castañeda AR, Perry SB. Enlarged
bronchial arteries after early repair of transposition of the great arteries. J
Am Coll Cardiol. 1993;21:465–70.
Irving C, Chaudhari M. Enlarged bronchial collateral artery complicating
recovery after arterial switch for simple transposition of the great arteries.
Interact Cardiovasc Thorac Surg. 2008;7(6):1176–7.
Santos MA, Azevedo VMP. Angiographic study of pulmonary circulation in
tetralogy of Fallot with pulmonary atresia. Arq Bras Cardiol. 2005;84:130–6.

10.

11. Won JH, Park SI, Park KJ, Oh YJ, Hwang SC. Microcatheter placement

through a side hole created in a 5-F catheter into proximal subclavian
arterial branches causing hemoptysis. J Vasc Interv Radiol. 2004;15:881–4.
12. Md Ralib AR, Han NT, Hin HS, Muda AS. Embolisation of a bronchial artery of
anomalous origin in massive haemoptysis. Malays J Med Sci. 2010;17:55–60.

13. Cho J, Shin T, Jun K, Ryoo J, Choi H, Choi B, et al. Transcatheter

embolization of bronchial artery arising from left circumflex coronary artery
in a patient with massive hemoptysis. Cardiovasc Intervent Radiol.
2010;33:169–72.

14. Golej J, Trittenwein G, Marx M, Schlemmer M. Aortopulmonary collateral

15.

artery embolization during postoperative extracorporeal membrane
oxygenation after arterial switch procedure. Artif Organs. 1999;23:1038–40.
Jiang S, Sun XW, Yu D, Jie B. Endovascular embolization of bronchial artery
originating from the upper portion of aortic arch in patients with massive
hemoptysis. Cardiovasc Intervent Radiol. 2014;37:94–100.

Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central
and take full advantage of: 

• Convenient online submission

• Thorough peer review

• No space constraints or color ﬁgure charges

• Immediate publication on acceptance

• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar

• Research which is freely available for redistribution

Submit your manuscript at 
www.biomedcentral.com/submit

