Feng et al. Journal of Medical Case Reports  (2015) 9:50 
DOI 10.1186/s13256-015-0522-y

JOURNAL OF MEDICAL
CASE REPORTS

CA SE R EP O R T
The modified Sugiura procedure as bridge
surgery for liver transplantation: a case report
An-Chieh Feng1, Chi-Yang Liao2, Hsiu-Lung Fan1, Teng-Wei Chen1 and Chung-Bao Hsieh1*

Open Access

Abstract

Introduction: Esophagogastric varices bleeding is a common complication due to portal hypertension in patients
with liver cirrhosis. With the advancement of nonoperative management including vasoactive agents, endoscopic
hemostasis or transjugular intrahepatic portosystemic shunt, surgical management has played a lesser role in recent
decades. The present report describes a patient with hepatitis B (HBV)-related liver cirrhosis and portal vein
thrombosis with recurrent esophagogastric varices bleeding despite the use of medical and endoscopic therapy.
The modified Sugiura procedure was performed as an alternative bridge surgery for liver transplantation in order
not to change the anatomic structure of the great vessels and to avoid hepatic encephalopathy related to shunting
procedures like the transjugular intrahepatic portosystemic shunt.
Case presentation: A 56-year-old Chinese man with a history of portal hypertension due to HBV-related liver
cirrhosis and known former recurrent esophageal varices bleeding status post Sengstaken-Blakemore tube tamponade
was referred to our hospital for liver transplantation evaluation because of persistent esophagogastric varices bleeding
with hypovolemic shock, even after medical and endoscopic therapies in a local hospital. As a result, liver cirrhosis
with Child-Pugh class B function was diagnosed. Despite the use of vasoactive agents, and endoscopic hemostasis
management, esophagogastric varices bleeding still occurred episodically with hypovolemic shock, which could not
be reversed by blood transfusion or Sengstaken-Blakemore tube tamponade. The modified Sugiura procedure, as an
alternative bridge therapy for patients who are candidates for liver transplantation, was performed, despite the fact that
his liver transplantation was not yet completed. He then received a living donor liver transplantation with the right lobe
of liver from his daughter. The postoperative course was uneventful, and he was discharged two weeks later. He had
no evidence of recurrent esophagogastric varices bleeding during the six-month follow-up.
Conclusions: The treatment experience of this case gave us not only the idea but also the practical way of applying
the modified Sugiura operation as a bridge and rescue therapy without alteration of the vascular anatomy and
hemodynamic stability for patients who have experienced refractory esophagogastric varices bleeding, despite the
use of medication and endoscopic treatment, and are candidates for receiving a liver transplantation.
Keywords: Sugiura procedure, Liver transplantation, Variceal bleeding, Portal hypertension, Liver cirrhosis

Introduction
Gastrointestinal bleeding associated with portal hyperten-
sion occurs most commonly from esophageal or gastric
varices. Managing variceal bleeding in patients with cir-
rhosis is most often achieved by medication with vaso-
active agents or endoscopic hemostasis or both. However,
persistent esophagogastric varices (EV) bleeding occurs in

* Correspondence: albert0920@yahoo.com.tw
1Division of General Surgery, Department of Surgery, Tri-Service General
Hospital, National Defense Medical Center, No.325, Sec. 2, Chenggong Rd.
Neihu Dist., Taipei 11490, Taiwan
Full list of author information is available at the end of the article

some patients with conditions like coagulopathy, portal
vein thrombosis, peptic ulcer disease, and the advanced
stage of liver failure. Therefore, some patients with fre-
quently recurrent variceal bleeding need more aggressive
therapy such as a transjugular intrahepatic portosystemic
shunt (TIPS) or surgical intervention [1].

We describe a patient with hepatitis B (HBV)-related
liver cirrhosis and recurrent EV bleeding even after
medical and endoscopic management. In order to avoid
anatomic and hemodynamic changes and hepatic enceph-
alopathy related to shunting procedures, the modified
Sugiura procedure was performed as a rescue therapy and

© 2015 Feng et al.; licensee BioMed Central. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and
reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly credited. The Creative Commons Public Domain
Dedication waiver (http://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/) applies to the data made available in this article,
unless otherwise stated.

Feng et al. Journal of Medical Case Reports  (2015) 9:50 

Page 2 of 4

short-term bridge for liver transplantation. The literature
was reviewed, and the utility of a modified Sugiura pro-
cedure as an alternative bridge therapy for patients who
are candidates for liver transplantation is discussed.

Case presentation
A 56-year-old Chinese man with a history of portal
hypertension due to HBV-related liver cirrhosis and
known former recurrent esophageal varices bleeding
status post Sengstaken-Blakemore tube tamponade was
referred to our hospital for liver transplantation evaluation
because of persistent EV bleeding with hypovolemic
shock, even after medical and endoscopic therapies in a
local hospital. On admission, he was hemodynamically un-
stable and was transferred to the intensive care unit for
close monitoring. Grade I encephalopathy and mild ascites
were noted during a physical examination, and the serum
laboratory tests disclosed hemoglobin 10.2g/dL, total bili-
rubin 3.3mg/dL, albumin 3.4g/dL, ammonia 220ug/dL,
and a prothrombin time of 33.6 seconds. As a result, liver
cirrhosis with Child-Pugh class B function was diagnosed.
An upper gastrointestinal endoscopy revealed F2 esopha-
geal varices with a healed ulcer, M/3 to L/3, and a mag-
netic resonance imaging (MRI) scan showed the relatively
small size of the portal vein in both hepatic lobes, which
may have been due to the hepatofugal flow or stasis
flow causing thrombosis (Figure 1A). Besides, a com-
puted tomography (CT) scan done in the previous
hospital revealed the presence of a long segment of
portal vein thrombosis (Figure 1B).

Despite the use of vasoactive agents, and endoscopic
hemostasis management, EV bleeding still occurred
episodically with hypovolemic shock, which could not be

reversed by blood transfusion or Sengstaken-Blakemore
tube tamponade. Although liver transplantation was the
optimal choice for our patient, he and his family still
needed some time to consider and the evaluation for his
liver transplantation was not yet completed either. As a
result, the modified Sugiura operation was performed as
an alternative treatment. In surgery, splenomegaly of
about 22×12×9cm3 in size and engorgement of the ves-
sels over
the esophagogastric junction were found.
Splenectomy was performed first and the operation was
completed with the subsequent devascularization of
paraesophagogastric and proximal gastric vessels with a
total blood loss of 850mL (Figure 2).

His EV bleeding was under control after the operation,
and 11 days later, all the necessary documentation was
completed and approved by the medical ethics commit-
tee. He then received a living donor liver transplantation
with the right lobe of liver (450gm) from his daughter.
During the operation, he was found to have portal vein
thrombosis, which was compatible with the CT and MRI
findings and thrombectomy was performed with a total
blood loss of 400cc. The postoperative course was un-
eventful, and he was discharged two weeks later. He had
no evidence of recurrent EV bleeding during the six-
month follow-up.

Discussion
With the advancement of vasoactive agents, endoscopic
hemostasis, and TIPS, the need for surgical treatment
for EV has decreased. However,
in some complicated
cases like coagulopathy, portal vein thrombosis, simul-
taneous peptic ulcer and severe liver cirrhosis, recurrent
EV bleeding can be a great challenge for the clinical doc-
tors. Although liver transplantation is considered as the
optimal treatment modality for advanced liver disease, re-
fractory EV bleeding may cause rapid deterioration; there-
fore, emergent surgical interventions, such as shunting or
nonshunting procedures, become the options for bleeding
control temporally to final transplantation. The frequently

Figure 1 Preoperative imaging study of the abdomen. (A) A
magnetic resonance imaging scan showed the relatively small size
of the portal vein in both hepatic lobes, which may have been
due to the hepatofugal flow or stasis flow causing thrombosis.
(B) A computed tomography scan done in the previous hospital
revealed the presence of a long segment of portal vein thrombosis
(white arrowhead).

Figure 2 Intraoperative image. (A) The modified Sugiura
procedure we performed was completed with the devascularization
of paraesophagogastric and (B) proximal gastric vessels.

Feng et al. Journal of Medical Case Reports  (2015) 9:50 

Page 3 of 4

applied shunting procedures include splenorenal and
mesocaval shunt; for nonshunting procedures, devascular-
ization and splenectomy are the most common.

Sugiura procedure is the nonshunting procedure for
EV bleeding, which was first proposed by Sugiura and
Futagawa in 1973 [2]. However, because of its complex-
ity and high postoperative morbidity and mortality, this
procedure has not been widely accepted in Western
countries [3]. Later in the 1980s, the modified Sugiura
procedure was introduced and proved to be effective in
controlling EV bleeding without complex procedures
needed [4]. However, with the development of multi-
modality therapies, surgical management for controlling
EV bleeding is still considered less important, especially
in hospitals with the TIPS facility, which have reported
promising results previously [5,6]. Nevertheless, obstruc-
tion and encephalopathy rates are high [7] and, because
of its high clinical technique requirements, TIPS is not
available in every hospital. In Taiwan, the TIPS proced-
ure is not covered by the National Health Insurance;
therefore, not all patients can afford it. In the present
case, we discussed the option of using a TIPS with the
patient’s family; however, they refused the procedure
because of poor financial status. Alternatively, non-
shunting procedures comprising devascularization and
splenectomy become another choice for patients with
refractory EV bleeding due to cirrhosis of the liver or
diffused portal vein thrombosis with less change to the
vascular anatomy. We decided to perform a nonshunt-
ing procedure based on the following reasons: (1) the
unstable preoperative status of our patient, and the
fact that shunting procedures may have prolonged the
operative time;
the shunting procedures would
have caused great hemodynamic change and are also
related to higher incidence of postoperative hepatic
encephalopathy, which may have worsened his pre-
transplant condition; and (3) shunting procedures may
have increased the technical difficulty of the subse-
quent
transplantation and also the related risk of
surgical complications.

(2)

In recent years, the modified Sugiura operation was
also considered to play some role in serving as a short-
term bridge therapy for patients with late-stage liver dis-
ease who are candidates for liver transplantation. For
those patients who have advanced liver failure,
liver
transplantation is the optimal choice, and shunting or
nonshunting operations can be considered as the treat-
ment for bleeding complications. Compared with the
risk of postoperative hepatic encephalopathy in surgical
shunts and TIPS, nonshunting procedures maintain por-
tal perfusion and hepatic, systemic hemodynamics in pa-
tients with cirrhosis, which result in a low incidence of
postoperative encephalopathy and many patients have a
better quality of life with prolonged survival [8,9].

The modified Sugiura procedure can be performed
through a one-stage transabdominal approach via the
midline incision or extension of a left subcostal incision
with the exposure of an L shape. The procedure starts
with splenectomy for improvement of
the exposure
followed by gastric and esophageal devascularization and
finally the esophageal transaction using a mechanical
stapler through a short gastrotomy. The Sugiura oper-
ation contains five componential procedures and eso-
phagogastric devascularization is the only remaining
part in the many different versions of the modified
Sugiura operation. The procedures we performed on this
patient included esophagogastric devascularization, and
splenectomy, and highly selective vagotomy with a total
operation time of four hours.

In the early era, operations for managing EV bleeding
were considered as a contraindication for patients who
were candidates for liver transplantation because they
could cause significant upper abdominal adhesions,
which might relate to increased intraoperative bleeding
and changes of anatomical structures and would result
in difficulties with the subsequent transplantation. How-
ever, in recent decades, because of the advancement of
adhesion-proof materials and the nature of nonshunting
operations that do not alter vascular anatomy and
hemodynamic stability,
these nonshunting operations
are considered to become a short-term bridge therapy to
liver transplantation without the complication of postop-
erative severe adhesion, especially for patients with
splanchnic thrombosis-caused refractory EV bleeding or
to earn more time for the patient and family to consider
liver transplantation and also to complete the preopera-
tive evaluations [3,8-11]. Besides, if the patient refused
to have a liver transplantation eventually, the modified
Sugiura operation could also serve as a long-term bleed-
ing control management with less incidence of encephal-
opathy and fewer hemodynamic changes [8,9,12].

Conclusions
The treatment experiences of this case give us not
only the idea but also a practical way of applying the
modified Sugiura operation as a bridge and rescue
therapy without alteration of the vascular anatomy
and hemodynamic stability for patients who experi-
ence refractory EV bleeding despite the use of medica-
tion and endoscopic treatment and are candidates for
receiving liver transplantation.

Consent
Written informed consent was obtained from the patient
for publication of this case report and any accompanying
images. A copy of the written consent is available for re-
view by the Editor-in-Chief of this journal.

Feng et al. Journal of Medical Case Reports  (2015) 9:50 

Page 4 of 4

Abbreviations
EV: Esophagogastric varices; TIPS: Transjugular intrahepatic portosystemic
shunt; MRI: Magnetic resonance imaging; CT: Computed tomography.

Competing interests
The authors declare that they have no competing interests.

Authors’ contributions
ACF and CYL assisted the operation and wrote the manuscript. HLF
performed the operation and patient care. TWC performed the operation
and collected data. CBH planned the operation and reviewed the
manuscript. All authors read and approved the final manuscript.

Author details
1Division of General Surgery, Department of Surgery, Tri-Service General
Hospital, National Defense Medical Center, No.325, Sec. 2, Chenggong Rd.
Neihu Dist., Taipei 11490, Taiwan. 2Department of Surgery, Song Shan
Branch, Tri-Service General Hospital, National Defense Medical Center, 131
Jiankang Road, Taipei 105, Taiwan.

Received: 8 October 2014 Accepted: 8 January 2015

References
1.

Borgonovo G, Costantini M, Grange D, Vons C, Smadja C, Franco D.
Comparison of a modified Sugiura procedure with portal systemic shunt
for prevention of recurrent variceal bleeding in cirrhosis. Surgery.
1996;119:214–21.
Sugiura M, Futagawa S. A new technique for treating esophageal varices.
J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 1973;66:677–85.
Selzner M, Tuttle-Newhall JE, Dahm F, Suhocki P, Clavien PA. Current
indication of a modified Sugiura procedure in the management of variceal
bleeding. J Am Coll Surg. 2001;193:166–73.
Ginsberg RJ, Waters PF, Zeldin RA, Spratt EH, Shandling B, Stone RM, et al.
A modified Sugiura procedure. Ann Thorac Surg. 1982;34:258–64.
Jalan R, Redhead DN, Simpson KJ, Elton RA, Hayes PC. Transjugular
intrahepatic portosystemic stent-shunt (TIPSS): long-term follow-up. QJM.
1994;87:565–73.
Eesa M, Clark T. Transjugular intrahepatic portosystemic shunt: state of the
art. Semin Roentgenol. 2011;46:125–32.
Casado M, Bosch J, Garcia-Pagan JC, Bru C, Banares R, Bandi JC, et al. Clinical
events after transjugular intrahepatic portosystemic shunt: correlation with
hemodynamic findings. Gastroenterology. 1998;114:1296–303.

2.

3.

4.

5.

6.

7.

8. Ma YG, Li XS, Zhao J, Chen H, Wu MC. Modified Sugiura procedure for the

9.

management of 160 cirrhotic patients with portal hypertension.
Hepatobiliary Pancreat Dis Int. 2004;3:399–401.
Tsimoyiannis EC, Gossios KJ, Tsianos EV. Modified Sugiura’s procedure may
improve liver function in portal hypertension. Hepatogastroenterology.
1997;44:492–5.

10. Mercado MA, Chan C, Zenteno-Guichard G, Vasques M, Hernandez J, Orozco

H. Results of surgical treatment (modified Sugiura-Futagawa operation) of
portal hypertension associated to complete splenomesoportal thrombosis
and cirrhosis. HPB Surg. 1999;11:157–62.
Shah SR, Nagral SS, Mathur SK. Results of a modified Sugiura’s devascularisation in
the management of “unshuntable” portal hypertension. HPB Surg. 1999;11:235–9.
12. Vons C, Hadengue A, Smadja C, Franco D, Lebrec D. Long-term hemodynamic

11.

effects of portocaval shunt and Sugiura procedure in patients with cirrhosis.
HPB Surg. 1996;9:209–13.

Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central
and take full advantage of: 

• Convenient online submission

• Thorough peer review

• No space constraints or color ﬁgure charges

• Immediate publication on acceptance

• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar

• Research which is freely available for redistribution

Submit your manuscript at 
www.biomedcentral.com/submit

