Prifti et al. Journal of Medical Case Reports  (2015) 9:51 
DOI 10.1186/s13256-015-0527-6

JOURNAL OF MEDICAL
CASE REPORTS

CA SE R EP O R T
Surgical treatment of a massive bilateral
pulmonary embolus due to an entrapped
thrombus in a patent foramen ovale: a case report
Edvin Prifti1, Fadil Ademaj2*, Arben Baboci1, Albana Doko1 and Daniela Teferici2

Open Access

Abstract

Introduction: Entrapped thrombus in a patent foramen ovale is a rare form of right heart thromboembolism.
Various treatments have been used, such as anti-coagulation and thrombolytic therapy, vena cava filter,
percutaneous thrombectomy and surgical embolectomy.
Case presentation: A 60-year-old Kosovan woman was admitted to our hospital with a massive bilateral pulmonary
thromboembolism, entrapped thrombus in the patent foramen ovale and severe right ventricular dysfunction.
The patient underwent on-pump beating-heart removal of the intracardiac thrombus and bilateral pulmonary
embolectomy with the use of a Fogarty catheter. The patient’s post-operative course was uneventful. In this report,
we describe for the first time in this pathology, to the best of our knowledge, a surgical strategy that seems to offer
an excellent outcome in patients with severe right ventricular dysfunction.
Conclusions: The chosen surgical technique, consisting of on-pump open beating-heart surgery, is a unique
procedure in the treatment of an acute pulmonary thromboembolism and entrapped thrombus in a patent
foramen ovale.
Keywords: Embolism, Entrapped, Foramen ovale, Patent, Pulmonary, Thrombus

Introduction
The presence of a patent foramen ovale (PFO) in acute
pulmonary embolism is associated with a significantly
higher incidence of death and embolic complications [1].
A thrombus entrapped in a PFO is a rare form of right
heart thromboembolism. In-hospital mortality of throm-
bus in transit is estimated to exceed 45% [2]. The first
documented case of impending paradoxical embolism or
entrapped thrombus through the PFO was reported in
1985 [3]. Various treatments have been described, such
as anti-coagulation and thrombolytic therapy, vena cava
filter, percutaneous thrombectomy and surgical embo-
lectomy [2,4,5]. In this report, we describe a case of a
patient with an entrapped thrombus through a PFO asso-
ciated with a massive bilateral pulmonary embolism who
underwent successful emergent surgical treatment, repre-
senting the first reported case in an emerging country, to

* Correspondence: fadilademaj-kosove@hotmail.com
2Division of Heart Disease, Gjakova Hospital, Rr Prizren, Gjakove, Kosovo
Full list of author information is available at the end of the article

the best of our knowledge. The surgical technique chosen,
consisting of on-pump open beating-heart surgery, is a
unique procedure in the treatment of an acute pulmonary
embolism and entrapped thrombus in a PFO.

Case presentation
A 60-year-old Kosovan woman was admitted at the
Division of Cardiac Surgery of our hospital on an emer-
gency basis with an acute onset of exertional dyspnea
associated with chest pain. Her medical history was posi-
tive for hypertension and hypercholesterolemia. A month
before, she had undergone a left-side total mastectomy
for treatment of breast cancer. She presented with sinus
rhythm, tachycardia, tachypnea, and pulse oximetry of
72% on room air. Her cardiac enzymes were normal. An
urgent transthoracic echocardiography was performed,
which demonstrated an embolus extending from the right
atrium to the left atrium through the PFO (Figure 1A).
Severe right ventricular dysfunction was present, with a
fractional area grade of almost 14%. Pulmonary hyper-
tension of 75mmHg was measured, which was associated

© 2015 Prifti et al.; licensee BioMed Central. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and
reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly credited. The Creative Commons Public Domain
Dedication waiver (http://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/) applies to the data made available in this article,
unless otherwise stated.

Prifti et al. Journal of Medical Case Reports  (2015) 9:51 

Page 2 of 4

Figure 1 Pre-operative imaging studies. (A) Pre-operative transthoracic echocardiogram shows an entrapped thrombus in the foramen ovale.
(B) Pre-operative contrast-enhanced computed tomographic scan shows a massive bilateral thromboembolism (white arrows). (C) Pre-operative
contrast-enhanced computed tomographic scan shows the intracardiac thrombus (white arrow).

with poor right ventricular function. Immediately, contrast-
enhanced computed tomography (CT) was performed,
which revealed severe bilateral pulmonary artery emboli
(Figure 1B) and a right atrial mass (Figure 1C). Coronary
angiography demonstrated a normal coronary tree.

The patient underwent an emergent on-pump beating-
heart surgical pulmonary and bilateral pulmonary em-
bolectomy. A bicaval and standard aortic cannulation
was performed. An extra 6-French line was extended
from the aortic line to the cardioplegic cannula. After
cardiopulmonary bypass was initiated, the ascending
aorta was clamped, and the line connected to the aortic
line with a cardioplegic cannula was unclamped, mak-
ing possible delivery of almost 800ml of blood per mi-
nute to the coronary arteries. The patient’s heart was
maintained in sinus rhythm during the operation. The
right atrium was opened, and the migrating thrombus
across the PFO was pulled out. The interatrial septum
was opened widely, and the left atrium was inspected
carefully and then closed after de-airing. The right atrium
was closed with a direct 4–0 continuous PROLENE™ poly-
propylene suture (Ethicon, Somerville, NJ, USA). Next,
the main pulmonary artery was opened and extended to-
ward the left pulmonary artery, and a 5-French Fogarty
catheter was employed to remove the thrombus from
the left pulmonary artery and its branches. The same

procedure was attempted to the right pulmonary artery
through the same incision, but it was unsuccessful.
Next, the right pulmonary artery close to the superior
vena cava was opened. The superior venous cannula
was removed and repositioned on the superior caval
vein, which was then detached from the right atrium.
The incision on the right pulmonary artery was extended
toward the right pulmonary hilus, which was opened com-
pletely, and the thrombus was removed. The embolec-
tomy of the branches of the right pulmonary artery was
performed using the same Fogarty catheter. Next, the
hilus was reconstructed using an autologous pericardial
patch, and the right pulmonary artery was closed. The
superior vena cava was then anastomosed to its usual
position at the right atrium. The air was removed care-
fully from the heart, and the aorta was declamped.

The patient’s post-operative course was uneventful, and
she was discharged on the eighth post-operative day. Post-
operatively, the patient received daily warfarin treatment
for 1 year to maintain a 2.5 to 3.5 international normalized
ratio. At 1 month after surgery, contrast-enhanced CT
showed a normal pulmonary tree (Figure 2A,B). At 1
month, the patient underwent inferior caval filter implant-
ation at another institution in a European Community
country. At 1 year after surgery, the patient was still alive
and free of symptoms.

Prifti et al. Journal of Medical Case Reports  (2015) 9:51 

Page 3 of 4

is doubt, transesophageal echocardiography can be em-
ployed successfully [9]. To the best of our knowledge,
there is no report of a false-positive diagnosis in the lit-
erature. Surprisingly, more than one-half of the reported
cases had an atypical clinical presentation without a para-
doxical or pulmonary embolism. This could be an add-
itional reason to perform routine echocardiography after
any pulmonary or arterial embolism. Echocardiography is
the first-line diagnostic tool for ruling out valvular heart
disease and diagnosing the presence of an entrapped
thrombus. This modality can help to determine right
heart tension, pulmonary pressure and cardiac function
in cases of pulmonary emboli, which are important mar-
kers for choosing the right treatment option.

In our patient, we detected an entrapped thrombus at
the PFO, most probably due to deep venous thrombosis,
but without systemic embolization. A Doppler examin-
ation revealed thrombosis of the deep veins of the right
leg. In such cases, duplex scanning of abdominal and
deep veins of the legs is also recommended, especially to
examine the possibility of placing an inferior caval filter
or clip. It is prudent to perform pulmonary CT angiog-
raphy as a first-line approach to assess for the presence
of pulmonary embolism.

The best management is still controversial. Three thera-
peutic options can be discussed. The impending thrombus
can be removed surgically, or it can be dissolved by
thrombolytics and/or anti-coagulation. Studies have found
that almost 65% of such patients underwent surgery, and
the mortality rate was 9.7% versus 36% and 32% mortality
in patients who underwent thrombolysis [10] or anti-
coagulation therapy [11]. Theoretically, thrombolysis and
even anti-coagulation therapy seem to be hazardous in
large, mobile intracardiac thrombi, with an important risk
of either fragmentation or complete embolization. More-
over, deep vein thrombosis can be a source of recurrent
embolisms. Conversely, the delay between clinical presen-
tation and echographic diagnosis can be extremely vari-
able, from 1 hour to a few weeks. In the cases with long
delays, the efficacy of thrombolytics or anti-coagulants
might be more hypothetical on an old thrombus.

We preferred surgery in our patient, even though we
were aware of the risks of cardiac surgery, as the patient
had cardiac failure. This therapeutic choice seemed to
be more rapid and complete than the others, as the PFO
would be closed at the same time [12]. No embolization
after surgical thrombus removal is reported. In our pa-
tient, we modified the usually employed technique. Be-
cause of our patient’s severe right ventricular dysfunction,
we preferred to perform on-pump open beating-heart sur-
gery, which permitted us to remove the entrapped throm-
bus in the PFO and all of the thrombus extending into the
pulmonary artery. Such a technique has been reported in
the treatment of ischemic heart disease [13] and mitral

Figure 2 Post-operative imaging studies. (A) Post-operative
contrast-enhanced computed tomographic scan shows total
removal of the thrombus on the right pulmonary artery. (B) Post-
operative contrast-enhanced computed tomographic scan shows
total removal of the thrombus on the left pulmonary artery.

Discussion
One-third of patients with deep venous thrombosis can
present with pulmonary embolisms and have a mortality
of approximatively 12% [6]. Floating right heart thrombi
are uncommon, and they are always associated with
acute pulmonary embolisms. Paradoxical movement of
the thrombus across a PFO indicates reversal of flow
from the right atrium to the left atrium due to acute pul-
monary embolism. Floating thrombi entrapped in a PFO
are extremely rare. In a careful review of the literature,
we found almost 111 reported cases. Pulmonary embo-
lism was most frequently found, accounting for almost
60% of the cases. Conversely, isolated systemic embolus
is rare. Only three cases are known [6], even though
echocardiography is generally performed after any stroke
or distal acute ischemia, which would be able to detect
such an embolus. Almost 37% of cases presented with
pulmonary and systemic emboli [7]. The reason for this
could be that a high right atrial pressure is necessary to
protrude a thrombus through the inter-atrial shunt [5,8].
In most cases, the diagnosis is made correctly on the
basis of transthoracic echocardiography, and, when there

Prifti et al. Journal of Medical Case Reports  (2015) 9:51 

Page 4 of 4

7.

8.

9.

Claver E, Larrousse E, Bernal E, López-Ayerbe J, Valle V. Giant thrombus
trapped in foramen ovale with pulmonary embolus and stroke. J Am Soc
Echocardiogr. 2004;17:916–8.
Augusseau MP, Pacouret G, Charbonnier B, Sirinelli A, Dreyfus X, Aupart M.
[Paradoxical embolism and thrombosis trapped in the foramen ovale:
role of transesophageal echocardiography]. Arch Mal Coeur Vaiss.
1997;90:1533–8. French.
Sattiraju S, Masri SC, Liao K, Missov E. Three-dimensional transesophageal
echocardiography of a thrombus entrapped by a patent foramen ovale.
Ann Thorac Surg. 2012;94:e101–2.

10. Hust MH, Staiger M, Braun B. Migration of paradoxic embolus through a

patent foramen ovale diagnosed by echocardiography: successful
thrombolysis. Am Heart J. 1995;129:620–2.

11. Bezgin T, Karabay CY, Aung SM, Kaymaz C. A third treatment option for

entrapped thrombus in patent foramen ovale. Tex Heart Inst J. 2010;37:384–5.
12. Ooi OC, Woitek F, Wong RC, Lee CN, Klima U, Kofidis T. Intra-atrial embolus

trapped in patent foramen ovale before systemic embolization. J Thorac
Cardiovasc Surg. 2010;139:e49–50.

13. Prifti E, Bonacchi M, Giunti G, Frati G, Proietti P, Leacche M, et al. Does

on-pump/beating-heart coronary artery bypass grafting offer better outcome
in end-stage coronary artery disease patients? J Card Surg. 2000;15:403–10.

14. Prifti E, Bonacchi M, Giunti G, Frati G, Leacche M, Bartolozzi F. Beating heart
ischemic mitral valve repair and coronary revascularization in patients with
impaired left ventricular function. J Card Surg. 2003;18:375–83.

valve disease [14] in patients with low left ventricular ejec-
tion fraction. We believe that the surgical strategy we
employed is an optimal procedure, especially in cases like
our patient’s with a presentation of severe right ventricular
dysfunction.

Conclusions
On the basis of our experience and our review of the re-
ported cases of entrapped thrombus in a PFO associated
with pulmonary thromboembolism, we conclude that
the surgery we performed seems to have the best results
among the therapeutic options for these patients. In ad-
dition, anti-coagulation or thrombolysis can pose secon-
dary complications, especially recurrent embolisms.

Consent
Written informed consent was obtained from the patient
for publication of this case report and any accompanying
images. A copy of the written consent is available for re-
view by the Editor-in-Chief of this journal.

Abbreviations
CT: Computed tomography; PFO: Patent foramen ovale.

Competing interests
The authors declare that they have no competing interests.

Authors’ contributions
EP and AB performed the urgent surgical procedure. FA and DF performed
the pre-operative diagnosis and invasive intervention. EP and FA drafted the
manuscript. AD performed the literature review. All authors read and
approved the final manuscript.

Acknowledgments
We would like to acknowledge Dr. Altin Veshti and Dr. Albi Fagu for support
regarding the treatment of the patient.

Author details
1Division of Cardiac Surgery, University Hospital Center of Tirana, Tirana,
Albania. 2Division of Heart Disease, Gjakova Hospital, Rr Prizren, Gjakove,
Kosovo.

Received: 28 October 2014 Accepted: 14 January 2015

References
1.

2.

3.

4.

5.

Rose PS, Punjabi NM, Pearse DB. Treatment of right heart thromboemboli.
Chest. 2002;121:806–14.
Chow BJ, Johnson CB, Turek M, Burwash IG. Impending paradoxical
embolus: a case report and review of the literature. Can J Cardiol.
2003;19:1426–32.
Nellessen U, Daniel WG, Matheis G, Oelert H, Depping K, Lichtlen PR.
Impending paradoxical embolism from atrial thrombus: correct diagnosis by
transesophageal echocardiography and prevention by surgery. J Am Coll
Cardiol. 1985;5:1002–4.
Aboyans V, Lacroix P, Ostyn E, Cornu E, Laskar M. Diagnosis and
management of entrapped embolus through a patent foramen ovale.
Eur J Cardiothorac Surg. 1998;14:624–8.
Fauveau E, Cohen A, Bonnet N, Gacem K, Lardoux H. Surgical or medical
treatment for thrombus straddling the patent foramen ovale: impending
paradoxical embolism? Report of four clinical cases and literature review.
Arch Cardiovasc Dis. 2008;101:637–44.

Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central
and take full advantage of: 

• Convenient online submission

• Thorough peer review

• No space constraints or color ﬁgure charges

• Immediate publication on acceptance

• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar

• Research which is freely available for redistribution

6. White RH. The epidemiology of venous thromboembolism. Circulation.

2003;107(23 Suppl 1):I4–8.

Submit your manuscript at 
www.biomedcentral.com/submit

