Anaizi et al. Journal of Medical Case Reports  (2015) 9:56 
DOI 10.1186/s13256-015-0514-y

JOURNAL OF MEDICAL
CASE REPORTS

CA SE R EP O R T
Open Access
Large cell neuroendocrine carcinoma of the lung
presenting as pseudoachalasia: a case report
Ahmad Anaizi1, Amna Rizvi-Toner1, Jessica Valestin1 and Ron Schey1,2*

Abstract

Introduction: Pseudoachalasia is a rare disease that accounts for only a small percentage of patients with
dysphagia. Neuroendocrine tumors are rare malignancies that most commonly originate within the gastrointestinal
tract, with the next most common site being the lungs. Esophageal neuroendocrine tumors are the least common
site within the gastrointestinal tract. Pseudoachalasia can be secondary to a malignant process within the body. Its
typical characteristic in elderly patients is a short duration of symptoms with substantial weight loss.
Case presentation: A 68-year-old woman presented with worsening dysphagia that had started six months after
the resection of a large cell neuroendocrine carcinoma of the lung in 2011. An extensive work-up in 2012, including
esophagogastroduodenoscopy, chest computed tomography and positron emission tomography, was unremarkable.
Esophageal manometries revealed findings characteristic of achalasia. A repeat esophagogastroduodenoscopy in
January of 2014 revealed a nearly circumferential ulcerated, fungating mass in her distal esophagus. Biopsy results
confirming a recurrence of her large cell neuroendocrine carcinoma.
Conclusion: We report a case of pseudoachalasia due to metastatic large cell neuroendocrine carcinoma of the lung.
Our patient had an exceptionally prolonged duration of symptoms preceding the local esophageal recurrence, which
was eventually revealed via endoscopy.

Introduction
Neuroendocrine neoplasms may arise in a number of or-
gans and come from cells containing vasoactive sub-
stances within secretory granules located in the cytoplasm
[1]. Neuroendocrine tumors can be classified further into
large cell neuroendocrine carcinoma (LCNEC), small cell
lung carcinoma (SCLC), and typical and atypical carcinoid
tumors [2]. The majority of these tumors arise from the
gastrointestinal tract and are known as gastropancreatic
neuroendocrine tumors. The next most common site for
neuroendocrine tumors is in the lungs. LCNEC was not
introduced as a distinct entity until 1991; these tumors
have a similarly grim prognosis to SCLC but have a cell
size of at least three times that of SCLC, as well as an
organoid growth pattern [3].

Achalasia is a condition in which there is a loss of in-
hibitory neurons of the myenteric plexus within the wall

* Correspondence: ron.schey@tuhs.temple.edu
1Division of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Department of Internal
Medicine, University of Iowa Carver College of Medicine, 200 Hawkins Drive,
52240 Iowa City, IA, USA
2Department of Medicine, Section of Gastroenterology, Temple University
School of Medicine, 3401 n Broad street, 19140 Philadelphia, PA, USA

of the esophagus. In pseudoachalasia, the patient presents
with clinical and manometric findings consistent with
achalasia, but the symptoms are caused by a secondary
organic entity. Pseudoachalasia needs to be excluded in
older patients (>60 years) who have a short duration of
symptoms (<one year) and substantial weight loss [4].
Malignancy-associated pseudoachalasia can occur via
one of three ways: the cancer can be located at the gas-
troesophageal junction and inhibit swallowing by mass
effect; esophageal neuronal invasion by the malignancy
can lead to a disruption of neuronal
transmission,
resulting in dysmotility of the esophagus and conse-
quent dysphagia; or a pseudoachalasia can be associated
with a paraneoplastic process [5]. The latter process is sec-
ondary to an autoimmune reaction whereby host T cells
recognize antigens expressed by the tumor and cross-react
with various parts of the central and peripheral immune
system. The most common autoantibody seen with this
phenomenon is type 1 antineuronal nuclear autoantibody,
also referred to as Anti-Hu antibody [6].

© 2015 Anaizi et al.; licensee BioMed Central. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and
reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly credited. The Creative Commons Public Domain
Dedication waiver (http://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/) applies to the data made available in this article,
unless otherwise stated.

Anaizi et al. Journal of Medical Case Reports  (2015) 9:56 

Page 2 of 3

We present the case of a patient with pseudoachalsia
due to metastatic LCNEC, who had a negative exten-
sive workup preceding luminal manifestation for over
two years.

Case presentation
Our patient was a 68-year-old woman with chronic ob-
structive pulmonary disease. She had no history of gas-
troesophageal reflux disease or esophageal disorders but
was found to have a progressive solitary pulmonary nod-
ule (1×1.3cm). A right lower wedge resection was per-
formed in December 2011 and the University of Iowa
pathology department identified the tumor as a LCNEC.
Approximately six months after her operation, our
patient started having slowly progressing dysphagia for
both solids and liquids. A positron emission tomography
(PET) scan performed in 2012, one year post surgery,
was unremarkable for recurrence or metastasis. Repeat
computed tomography (CT) in June 2013 (18 months
post surgery) did not show any recurrence (Figure 1).
Our patient had an esophagogastroduodenoscopy (EGD)
and barium swallow that revealed no stricture of her
esophagus but failure of primary and secondary peristaltic
waves and reflux. In July 2013, esophageal manometry
found failure of the lower esophageal sphincter to relax,
with a residual pressure of 32mmHg. Our patient was
treated with calcium channel blockers with partial relief.

levels. However,

Thus far, up to 18 months post resection, our patient
had been able to maintain her weight and her basic labora-
tory parameters, including hemoglobin, albumin and chol-
esterol
in January 2014, she reported
worsening dysphagia and weight loss of 10lbs over a
period of one month. She was referred to our center for
further treatment of her achalasia. A repeat esophageal
manometry showed an elevated lower esophageal sphinc-
ter pressure of 50mmHg as well non-propagative, non-

peristaltic contractions throughout her esophageal muscu-
lature (Figure 2). A repeat EGD with an intention to per-
form therapeutic pneumatic dilation showed a nearly
circumferential ulcerated, fungating mass from approxi-
mately 36cm that extended to her gastroesophageal junc-
tion at 39cm. Biopsies revealed a LCNEC with similar
features to the primary tumor resected in 2011, and was
concluded to be a metastasis. Subsequently, a repeat CT
scan revealed progressive diffuse metastatic disease. Our
patient underwent two courses of chemotherapy but died
from the disease after six months.

Conclusion
Pseudoachalasia is rare, and approximately 5% of pa-
tients with manometric findings of achalasia have a ma-
lignant disorder. The primary malignancies are mainly of
the esophagus or gastroesophageal junction (over 50%),
followed by metastases (mainly to the lung and breast)
of paraneoplastic syndromes in the context of small-cell
carcinoma, bronchial carcinoma, gastric carcinoma and
pleural mesothelioma [7].

We report a case of pseudoachalasia due to metastatic
LCNEC of the lung in a 68 year-old woman, with mild
onset of symptoms for two years prior to substantial
weight loss. Over one year after her surgery, our patient
had normal findings on an EGD, chest CT and PET scan.
Her manometric and radiological findings were consist-
ent with progressive achalasia. Although it might be dif-
ficult to diagnose in an early phase, it is very uncommon
for a patient with metastatic pseudoachalasia to maintain
weight and clinical stability for a period as long as over
two years before establishment of luminal findings.

Figure 1 Coronal view of a computed tomography scan of
the chest.

Figure 2 Esophageal manometry demonstrating the patients
type 1 achalasia.

Anaizi et al. Journal of Medical Case Reports  (2015) 9:56 

Page 3 of 3

We would like to suggest here that in an older patient
newly diagnosed with achalasia, regardless of normal CT
and PET scan results over one year after tumor resec-
tion, persistence or worsening of symptoms with exten-
sive weight loss should indicate thorough and repeat
work-up until a diagnosis of metastatic pseudoachalasia
can be ruled out.

Consent
Written informed consent was obtained from the patient
for the publication of this report and any accompanying
images.

Competing interests
The authors declare that they have no competing interests.

Authors’ contributions
AA- Acquisition of data, literature search and drafting the manuscript.
ART- Acquisition of data, Administrative and material support. JV- Acquisition of
data, administrative and material support. RS- Initiator of manuscript, critical
revision and drafting of manuscript. All authors read and approved the
final manuscript.

Received: 11 July 2014 Accepted: 6 January 2015

References
1.

Estrozi B, Bacchi CE. Neuroendocrine tumors involving the
gastroenteropancreatic tract: a clinicopathological evaluation of 773 cases.
Clinics (Sao Paulo). 2011;66(10):1671–5.
Fernandez FG, Battafarano RJ. Large-cell neuroendocrine carcinoma of the
lung: an aggressive neuroendocrine lung cancer. Semin Thorac Cardiovasc
Surg. 2006;18(3):206–10.

2.

4.

5.

6.

3. Modlin IM, Lye KD, Kidd M. A 5-decade analysis of 13,715 carcinoid tumors.

Cancer. 2003;97(4):934–59.
Campo SM, Zullo A, Scandavini CM, Frezza B, Cerro P, Balducci G.
Pseudoachalasia: a peculiar case report and review of the literature. World J
Gastrointest Endosc. 2013;5(9):450–4.
Brown WR, Dee E. Dysphagia in a patient with recurrent small-cell lung
cancer. Gastroenterology. 2013;144(1):34. 252–3.
Hirano I. Pathophysiology of achalasia and diffuse esophageal spasm.
GI Motility Online. 2006. doi:10.1038/gimo22

7. Martínez C, Targarona EM, Sainz S, Cerdán G, Novell J, Trias M.

Pseudoachalasia: a diagnosis to consider in the assessment of dysphagia.
Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2000;23:14–5.

Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central
and take full advantage of: 

• Convenient online submission

• Thorough peer review

• No space constraints or color ﬁgure charges

• Immediate publication on acceptance

• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar

• Research which is freely available for redistribution

Submit your manuscript at 
www.biomedcentral.com/submit

