Akahane et al. Journal of Medical Case Reports  (2015) 9:105 
DOI 10.1186/s13256-015-0586-8

JOURNAL OF MEDICAL
CASE REPORTS

CA SE R EP O R T
Myositis ossificans occupying the thenar region:
a case report
Tsutomu Akahane1*, Naoya Mori1 and Yukio Nakatsuchi2

Open Access

Abstract

Introduction: Myositis ossificans is a benign, self-limiting, tumor-like lesion that usually affects the elbow and thigh;
occurrence in the hand is uncommon. We report a rare case of a patient with myositis ossificans in the thenar region.
Case presentation: A 15-year-old Japanese girl presented to our hospital with a 2-month history of a painful mass
in the right thenar region without previous trauma. The clinical and radiological examination findings suggested an
osteoblastic malignancy. A diagnosis of myositis ossificans was made on the basis of an incisional biopsy. Despite the
location of the lesion in the thenar region, a normal functional outcome was achieved after marginal resection of
the mature lesion.
Conclusions: Clinicians should consider myositis ossificans as a possible diagnosis for a soft tissue mass in the hand,
thereby avoiding unnecessarily aggressive therapy.
Keywords: Hand, Myositis ossificans, Soft tissue calcification, Thenar region

Introduction
Myositis ossificans is a benign, tumor-like lesion of hete-
rotopic ossification that affects the muscles, particularly
those around the elbow and thigh; occurrence in the
hand is uncommon [1]. Despite its being a clinically and
histologically distinct entity, diagnosis may be consider-
ably difficult, especially when it is located in an uncom-
mon site. We report a rare case of a patient with myositis
ossificans in the thenar muscles and discuss the differen-
tial diagnostic and surgical interventions performed.

Case presentation
A 15-year-old Japanese girl was referred to our hospital
because of a 2-month history of a painful mass in the
dominant right thenar region. She had no history of
acute injury and had not participated in any sports acti-
vity. An examination of the thenar region revealed that
it was swollen and well circumscribed, and a firm mass
was palpable. Minimal
tenderness and warmth
were noted. Her thumb movement was slightly re-
including
stricted, with pain. Her laboratory findings,

local

* Correspondence: t.akahane@nagano-hosp.go.jp
1Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Shinshu-Ueda Medical Center, 1-27-21
Midorigaoka, Ueda, Nagano 386-8610, Japan
Full list of author information is available at the end of the article

white blood cell count, erythrocyte sedimentation rate
and C-reactive protein level, were normal.

Radiographs of

the hand (Figure 1) showed well-
demarcated calcification or ossification just volar to the
carpals; there was no suspicion of a previous bone injury
or periosteal reaction. Ultrasound (Figure 2) revealed a
lesion with a firm surface. Magnetic resonance imaging
(MRI) (Figure 3) showed a mass within the thenar emi-
nence with peripheral edema.

An incisional biopsy was performed for a definitive
diagnosis. Histopathologically, most of the mass com-
prised immature fibroblastic tissue with a mild degree of
mitotic activity, and some osteoid was also observed
(Figure 4). The combination of histopathological and
radiological findings revealed a distinct “zonal pattern”:
The innermost portion of the mass comprised fibroblas-
tic tissue; the intermediate zone comprised ill-defined
trabeculae and/or osteoid; and the periphery comprised
calcification and mature lamellar bone. On the basis of
these histopathological findings, a diagnosis of myositis
ossificans was made.

The patient’s pain persisted and occurred sponta-
neously, and the prognosis of the firm mass was unfavor-
able. We decided to perform a marginal resection after
radiographically confirming the maturation of the lesion
without accompanying destructive growth. Radiography

© 2015 Akahane et al.; licensee BioMed Central. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and
reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly credited. The Creative Commons Public Domain
Dedication waiver (http://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/) applies to the data made available in this article,
unless otherwise stated.

Akahane et al. Journal of Medical Case Reports  (2015) 9:105 

Page 2 of 4

The patient was treated with a splint post-operatively.
At the 7-month follow-up examination, the patient was
asymptomatic and exhibited normal function and a full
range of motion of all digits of the hand, particularly
thumb flexion, abduction and apposition. The surgical
procedure produced a good outcome, as evaluated with
the disability/symptom score of the Japanese Society for
Surgery of the Hand version of the Disability of the
Arm, Shoulder, and Hand questionnaire [2]; that is, 52.5
points pre-operatively and 7.8 points at follow-up.

Discussion
Myositis ossificans is a localized, self-limiting, ossifying
process that usually follows mechanical trauma: 60% to
75% of all cases involve trauma [1,3]. Identical lesions
also occur in persons with no apparent history of pre-
ceding injury, and in some of these cases, an infectious
process has been considered to be a possible cause or
the initiating factor. Although our patient had no history
of significant injury, whether minor repetitive injuries
were present could not be ascertained.

Myositis ossificans involves the limbs in about 80% of
cases. The most commonly affected sites in the lower
extremity are the quadriceps and gluteus muscles, and
those in the upper extremity are the flexor muscles, par-
ticularly the brachialis muscle [1]. However, involvement
of the hand is rare, and only a few cases have been re-
ported to date [4-8].

Myositis ossificans represents diffuse soft tissue swel-
ling following injury. This swelling gradually develops

Figure 1 Radiographs of the case. (a) Lateral and (b) carpal tunnel
aspects of the right hand showing ossification of soft tissues over
the volar aspect of the thenar region.

showed that the superficial thenar muscles (the flexor pol-
licis brevis and its superficial head as well as the abductor
pollicis brevis) remained intact; however, deeper structures
such as the opponens pollicis and the deep head of the
flexor pollicis brevis were completely occupied by the
myositis ossificans. Both the adductor pollicis muscle and
the flexor pollicis longus tendon were clearly separate
from the lesion. The resected specimen was well circum-
scribed and showed a distinct zonal pattern of myositis
ossificans characterized by the presence of fibroblastic
tissue with chronic inflammatory cells, osteoid, mature
lamellar bone and surrounding muscle.

Figure 2 Ultrasound image of the hand. A lesion with a firm surface was present.

Akahane et al. Journal of Medical Case Reports  (2015) 9:105 

Page 3 of 4

Figure 3 Axial magnetic resonance images of the hand. (a) T1-weighted (repetition time (TR), 561ms; echo time (TE), 20ms) and (b) T2-weighted
(TR, 3500ms; TE, 90ms) images of the right hand showing a well-circumscribed mass occupying the thenar muscles.

into a firm mass [1], the periphery of which is the most
densely calcified (zoning phenomenon) visualized by
radiography or computed tomography. The lesion has
also been shown to be a heterogeneous mass producing
extensive muscle edema on MRI scans [9].

When myositis ossificans occurs in its common loca-
tions and/or if a clear clinical history and findings are
obtained, the diagnosis is not complicated. However, the
differential diagnosis may be a problem in patients with
a lesion that lacks the characteristic zoning phenomenon
and grows in an irregular multifocal or multilobulated
fashion [1]. In our patient, the rare location of the lesion
and the lack of previous injuries necessitated histopatho-
logical assessment to distinguish the lesion from extra-
skeletal osteosarcoma. In contrast to myositis ossificans,
osteosarcoma presents a more disorderly growth of
hyperchromatic and pleomorphic cells with osteoid for-
mation. Additionally, the greater degree of cellular atypism
and infiltration of neighboring tissues in a destructive
manner are highly indicative of this lesion. Although

mitotic figures are present in immature myositis ossificans
and osteosarcoma lesions, clearly atypical or tripolar forms
point toward malignancy [1].

Because myositis ossificans is a benign, self-limiting
process, its prognosis is excellent. There is no need for
further therapy once the diagnosis of myositis ossificans
has been established by biopsy or local excision [1].
However, aggressive surgical treatment may be required
to alleviate intractable pain due to compression of neural
tissue and limitation of function [5]. In our patient, we
decided to perform surgery after the lesion matured.
Intra-operatively, we found that the myositis ossificans
occupied the vast majority of the thenar region, particu-
larly the opponens pollicis and the deep head of the
flexor pollicis brevis. The patient’s post-operative course
was nevertheless uneventful, and no functional deficit
was apparent.

The following thumb functions are coordinated by
several muscles: Thumb flexion is integrated by the
flexor pollicis longus and flexor pollicis brevis, extension

Figure 4 Biopsy specimen. Immature fibroblastic tissue with a mild degree of mitotic activity and some osteoid were observed. Hematoxylin and
eosin staining; original magnification, ×10.

Akahane et al. Journal of Medical Case Reports  (2015) 9:105 

Page 4 of 4

7.

8.

9.

De Smet L, Degreef I. Myositis ossificans of the hand in a child: case report.
J Pediatr Orthop B. 2012;21:539–41.
Chadha M, Agarwal A. Myositis ossificans traumatica of the hand. Can J
Surg. 2007;50:E21–2.
Ehara S, Nakasato T, Tamakawa Y, Yamataka H, Murakami H, Abe M. MRI of
myositis ossificans circumscripta. Clin Imaging. 1991;15:130–4.

by the extensor pollicis longus and extensor pollicis
brevis, abduction by the abductor pollicis longus and
abductor pollicis longus brevis, and adduction by the
adductor pollicis and first dorsal interosseous. Thumb
apposition is controlled by the coordinated movement of
the abductor pollicis longus, abductor pollicis brevis, op-
ponens pollicis and flexor pollicis brevis. The affected
deep heads of the occupied opponens pollicis and flexor
pollicis brevis were not extensively involved in the
thumb discordance.

Conclusions
We report a rare case of a patient with myositis ossifi-
cans that occupied the thenar muscles. Surgical inter-
vention enabled normal function. Because of the rare
location of the lesion, incisional biopsy was necessary to
establish the diagnosis.

Consent
Written informed consent was obtained from the pa-
tient’s legal guardians for publication of this case report
and any accompanying images. A copy of the written
consent is available for review by the Editor-in-Chief of
this journal.

Abbreviations
MRI: Magnetic resonance imaging; TE: Echo time; TR: Repetition time.

Competing interests
The authors declare that they have no competing interests.

Authors’ contributions
TA managed the patient and drafted the manuscript. NM and YN participated
in the design of the study and helped to draft the manuscript. All authors read
and approved the final manuscript.

Acknowledgments
The authors thank Dr Toshitaka Maejima, Division of Pathology, Shinshu-Ueda
Medical Center, for help in the histopathological interpretation.

Author details
1Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Shinshu-Ueda Medical Center, 1-27-21
Midorigaoka, Ueda, Nagano 386-8610, Japan. 2Department of Orthopaedic
Surgery, Marunouchi Hospital, 1-7-45 Nagisa, Matsumoto, Nagano 390-8601,
Japan.

Received: 30 July 2014 Accepted: 4 April 2015

References
1. Weiss SW, Goldblum JR. Osseous soft tissue tumors. In: Enzinger and Weiss’s

2.

3.

4.

5.

6.

soft tissue tumors. 4th ed. St Louis, MO: Mosby; 2001. p. 1389–405.
Imaeda T, Toh S, Nakao Y, Nishida J, Hirata H, Ijichi M, et al. Validation of the
Japanese Society for Surgery of the Hand version of the Disability of the
Arm, Shoulder, and Hand questionnaire. J Orthop Sci. 2005;10:353–9. A
published erratum appears in J Orthop Sci. 2007;12:107.
Parikh J, Hyare H, Saifuddin A. The imaging features of post-traumatic
myositis ossificans, with emphasis on MRI. Clin Radiol. 2002;57:1058–66.
Schütte HE, van der Heul RO. Pseudomalignant, nonneoplastic osseous
soft-tissue tumors of the hand and foot. Radiology. 1990;176:149–53.
Kusuma S, Lourie GM, Lins RE. Myositis ossificans of the hand. J Hand Surg
Br. 1999;24:128–30.
Jayasekera N, Joshy S, Newman-Sanders A. Myositis ossificans traumatica of
the thenar region. J Hand Surg Br. 2005;30:507–8.

Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central
and take full advantage of: 

• Convenient online submission

• Thorough peer review

• No space constraints or color ﬁgure charges

• Immediate publication on acceptance

• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar

• Research which is freely available for redistribution

Submit your manuscript at 
www.biomedcentral.com/submit

