Kawahara et al. Journal of Medical Case Reports  (2015) 9:44 
DOI 10.1186/s13256-015-0529-4

JOURNAL OF MEDICAL
CASE REPORTS

CA SE R EP O R T
Ureteroscopy-assisted retrograde nephrostomy
for a large and obstructive renal pelvic stone: a
case report
Takashi Kawahara1,2*, Hiroki Ito1,2, Hideyuki Terao1, Hiroji Uemura2, Yoshinobu Kubota2 and Junichi Matsuzaki1

Open Access

Abstract

Introduction: We have previously described the use of ureteroscopy-assisted retrograde nephrostomy. However,
reaching the target calyx with the ureteroscope is difficult in patients with obstructive renal pelvic stones.
Case presentation: A 53-year-old Japanese woman was referred to our department for the treatment of a right
renal stone. She was admitted to our department for percutaneous nephrolithotomy of a right renal stone located
at her ureteropelvic junction. A Lawson retrograde nephrostomy puncture wire was subsequently inserted into the
flexible ureteroscope, and we successfully punctured the calyx from the target spot to the skin. The nephrostomy
was dilated, and the stone fragments were obtained and removed.
Conclusions: We here report the case of a large and obstructive renal stone successfully treated with percutaneous
nephrolithotomy using the ureteroscopy-assisted retrograde nephrostomy technique.
Keywords: PCNL, UARN, Ureteroscopy

Introduction
Goodwin et al.
first reported obtaining percutaneous
renal access in 1955 [1]. Subsequently, the technique of
percutaneous nephrolithotomy (PCNL) was developed
and has since become the standard procedure for treat-
ing large renal stones [2]. In the ureteroscopy-assisted
retrograde nephrostomy (UARN) technique,
it is pos-
sible to continuously visualize the area of dilation from
the time of puncture to insertion of the nephron access
sheath (NAS). In patients with obstructive renal pelvic
stones, reaching the target calyx with a ureteroscope
(URS) is difficult. In most cases, it is feasible to reach
the target calyx next to large renal calculi. However, in
some cases, it is not possible to reach the target calyx
due to the presence of a renal stone occupying the area
of the ureteropelvic junction. We here report a case of a
large and obstructive renal stone successfully treated
with PCNL using UARN.

* Correspondence: takashi_tk2001@yahoo.co.jp
1Department of Urology, Ohguchi Higashi General Hospital, 2-19-1, Irie,
Kanagawa-ku, Yokohama City, Kanagawa, Japan
2Department of Urology, Yokohama City University Graduate School of
Medicine, 3-9, Fukuura, Kanazawa-ku, Yokohama City, Japan

Case presentation
A 53-year-old Japanese woman was referred to our de-
partment for the treatment of a right, large, obstructive
renal pelvic stone and smaller lower pole calyceal stone
(Figures 1a and 1b). She had no remarkable previous or
family history, and the laboratory data showed no re-
markable findings, except for microhematuria on a urine
analysis. In April 2011, she was admitted to our depart-
ment for PCNL to treat a right renal stone located at her
ureteropelvic junction. In brief, under general and epidural
anesthesia, she was placed in a modified-Valdivia position
(Galdakao-modified Valdivia position) [3]. A flexible URS
(Flex-X2, Karl Storz, Germany) was inserted through an
inserted ureteral access sheath (Flexor® 12-Fr, 35cm, Cook
Urological, USA) into her ureter. A stone occupied the
area around her ureteropelvic junction, and the URS could
not be advanced to the target calyx. Therefore, we first
made a root using holmium:yttrium-aluminum-garnet
(Ho:YAG) laser lithotripsy in order to reach the target
calyx. Intracorporeal
lithotripsy was subsequently per-
formed using a Ho:YAG laser (with a 200μm fiber, 1.0J,
5Hz; VersaPulse® 30W, Lumenis Surgical, USA), and the
URS was then advanced to the target spot in order to
puncture it through the root.

© 2015 Kawahara et al.; licensee BioMed Central. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and
reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly credited. The Creative Commons Public Domain
Dedication waiver (http://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/) applies to the data made available in this article,
unless otherwise stated.

Kawahara et al. Journal of Medical Case Reports  (2015) 9:44 

Page 2 of 2

Figure 1 Pre- and post- operative images. (a) Preoperative kidney, ureter and bladder and (b) axial computed tomography. (c) Postoperative
kidney, ureter and bladder.

Next, a Lawson retrograde nephrostomy puncture wire
(Cook Urological) was inserted into the flexible URS,
and the calyx was successfully punctured from the target
spot to the skin. A 24-Fr percutaneous NAS (X-Force®
nephrostomy balloon dilation catheter, BARD Medical,
USA) was passed over the balloon under continuous
visualization with the URS, and, following insertion of the
NAS into the renal collecting system, calculus fragmenta-
tion was undertaken using a Swiss LithoClast® pneumatic
lithotripter (EMS, Switzerland) through a rigid nephro-
scope (percutaneous nephroscope, Karl Storz, Germany).
A postoperative kidney, ureter and bladder film showed
no residual stones (Figure 1c). The length of the operation
was 175 minutes; no major or minor complications were
observed. The postoperative ureteral stent was removed 2
weeks after the procedure, and no residual stone frag-
ments or signs of postoperative ureteral stricture were
noted on computed tomography . A stone analysis showed
the stone to be composed of calcium oxalate.

Conclusions
We previously reported the application of UARN and con-
firmed its effectiveness during PCNL [3]. With the UARN
technique, the nephrostomy can be made easily at the tar-
get puncture site under continuous visualization. The
present procedure for performing UARN during PCNL
has several advantages. For example, after the needle exits
through the skin, no further steps are required in prepar-
ation for dilation [3-5].

In recent years, major advances have made observation
of the renal pelvis easier, making it possible to perform a
wide variety of intrarenal procedures using a URS [3].
Therefore, it is now easier to approach the desired renal
calyx using a flexible URS than was previously possible
using the fluoroscopic approach [4,6]. In our experience
with UARN, the URS can be applied to continuously ob-
tain the ideal angle.

As observed in the current case, the URS sometimes is
unable to reach the renal collecting system due to the

presence of a large stone at the ureteropelvic junction.
Making the nephrostomy in cases of hydronephrosis is
easy; however, puncturing the target calyx is important in
order to free the stone in cases similar to the present case.
We here reported a case of a large and obstructive
renal stone successfully treated with PCNL using UARN.

Consent
Written informed consent was obtained from the patient
for publication of this case report and any accompanying
images. A copy of the written consent form is available
for review by the Editor-in-Chief of this journal.

Abbreviations
Ho:YAG: Holmium:yttrium-aluminum-garnet; NAS: Nephron access sheath;
PCNL: Percutaneous nephrolithotomy; UARN: Ureteroscopy-assisted
retrograde nephrostomy; URS: Ureteroscopy; NAS: Nephro access sheath.

Competing interests
The authors declare that they have no competing interests.

Authors’ contributions
TK, HI, HT and JM performed the operation and follow-up. TK conceived of
the study, and participated in its design and wrote the manuscript. HU and
YK helped to check the draft. All authors read and approved the final
manuscript

Received: 5 August 2014 Accepted: 14 January 2015

References
1.

Goodwin WE, Casey WC, Woolf W. Percutaneous trocar (needle)
nephrostomy in hydronephrosis. J Am Med Assoc. 1955;157(11):891–4.
Obek C, Onal B, Kantay K, Kalkan M, Yalcin V, Oner A, et al. The efficacy of
extracorporeal shock wave lithotripsy for isolated lower pole calculi
compared with isolated middle and upper caliceal calculi. J Urol.
2001;166(6):2081–4. discussion 2085.
Kawahara T, Ito H, Terao H, Yoshida M, Ogawa T, Uemura H, et al.
Ureteroscopy assisted retrograde nephrostomy: a new technique for
percutaneous nephrolithotomy (PCNL). BJU Int. 2012;110(4):588–90.
Hunter PT, Finlayson B, Drylie DM, Leal J, Hawkins IF. Retrograde
nephrostomy and percutaneous calculus removal in 30 patients. J Urol.
1985;133(3):369–74.
Hawkins Jr IF, Hunter P, Leal G, Nanni G, Hawkins M, Finlayson B, et al.
Retrograde nephrostomy for stone removal: combined cystoscopic/
percutaneous technique. AJR Am J Roentgenol. 1984;143(2):299–304.
Lawson RK, Murphy JB, Taylor AJ, Jacobs SC. Retrograde method for
percutaneous access to kidney. Urology. 1983;22(6):580–2.

2.

3.

4.

5.

6.

