Mahdi et al. Journal of Medical Case Reports  (2015) 9:80 
DOI 10.1186/s13256-015-0556-1

JOURNAL OF MEDICAL
CASE REPORTS

CA SE R EP O R T
Malignant renal epithelioid angiomyolipoma
associated with abdominopelvic hydatid cysts:
a case report
Youssef Mahdi1,3*, Kaoutar Znati1,3, Ali Iken2,3, Zakiya Bernoussi1,3, Fouad Zouaidia1,3, Ahmed Jahid1,3,
Yassine Nouini2,3 and Najat Mahassini1,3

Open Access

Abstract

Introduction: The World Health Organization defines epithelioid angiomyolipoma as a potentially malignant
mesenchymal neoplasm characterized by proliferation of predominantly epithelioid cells and as closely related to
the triphasic (classic) angiomyolipoma. It can be benign, potentially aggressive or malignant. The pathologist's role
is crucial in making a positive diagnosis, providing appropriate patient management and assessing prognosis. In this
report, we present a case of a patient with an epithelioid angiomyolipoma and hydatid cyst association. To the best
of our knowledge, such an association has not been reported previously in the literature.
Case presentation: A 70-year-old Arabian woman presented to our hospital with a 6-month history of a right
lumbago and weight loss. Computed tomography objectified a mid-right renal tumor, several locoregional lymph
nodes and four abdominopelvic cystic formations. The patient underwent a right nephroureterectomy and removal
of abdominal and pelvic masses. Histologically, the tumor corresponded to a proliferation of large eosinophil cells,
polygonal or ovoid, with epithelial appearance, and associated with thickened, hyalinized vessel walls, fat cells and
bundles of smooth muscle cells. Mitoses were estimated at 2 per 50 high-power fields. In immunohistochemical
study, epithelioid tumor cells expressed S-100 protein and Melan-A. The diagnosis of malignant epithelioid
angiomyolipoma was made. The wall of the abdominopelvic cysts was eosinophilic and lamellar, corresponding to
the cuticular membrane of hydatid cysts.
Conclusion: In our patient, careful histological examination and immunohistochemical study allowed us to make
the correct diagnosis of angiomyolipoma in its malignant form. The association with hydatid cysts is what makes
our case original.
Keywords: Epithelioid angiomyolipoma, Hydatid cysts, Immunohistochemistry, Kidney

Introduction
The World Health Organization (WHO) defines renal
epithelioid angiomyolipoma (AML) as a potentially ma-
lignant mesenchymal neoplasm characterized by prolif-
eration of predominantly epithelioid cells and closely
related to the triphasic (classic) AML [1]. The latter is
composed of a mixture of thick-walled blood vessels,
smooth muscle cells and adipose tissue [1-3]. Epithelioid

* Correspondence: ysf.mahdi@gmail.com
1Department of Pathology, Ibn Sina University Hospital, Ahmed Balafrej
Avenue, 10000 Rabat, Morocco
3Faculty of Medicine and Pharmacy, Mohammed V Souissi University,
Mohamed Belarbi El Alaoui Avenue, 6203 Rabat, Morocco
Full list of author information is available at the end of the article

AML can be benign, potentially aggressive or malignant
[1,4-6]. The diagnosis is histological. Immunohistochem-
istry has a major interest in the positive and differential
diagnosis. The pathologist should also search for aggres-
sive histological criteria, crucial to appropriate patient
management and prognosis assessment. In this report,
we present a case of a patient with epithelioid angiomyo-
lipoma and hydatid cyst association. To the best of our
knowledge, such an association has not been reported
previously in the literature.

© 2015 Mahdi et al.; licensee BioMed Central. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and
reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly credited. The Creative Commons Public Domain
Dedication waiver (http://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/) applies to the data made available in this article,
unless otherwise stated.

Mahdi et al. Journal of Medical Case Reports  (2015) 9:80 

Page 2 of 5

Figure 1 Tomodensitometric scans reveal a mid-right renal tumor measuring 12cm. (A) The tumor is breaking the renal capsule. (B) Peripheral
contrast-enhanced image.

Case presentation
A 70-year-old Arabian woman presented to our hospital
with a 6-month history of a right lumbago and weight loss.
She had no personal or family history of tuberous scler-
osis. Her physical examination revealed a mass occupying
the right side of the lumbar region. Computed tomog-
raphy (CT) was performed, which demonstrated a large
heterogeneous mass measuring 12cm within the middle of
the right kidney, with venous thrombosis and several
lymph nodes of the renal pedicle and interaortocaval re-
gions (Figure 1). The left kidney had no anomaly. It also
showed the presence of four abdominopelvic cystic forma-
tions measuring between 3.3cm and 10.5cm, some of
which were calcified (Figure 2). These radiological findings
favored the diagnosis of malignant renal tumor associated
with abdominopelvic hydatid cysts. Thus,
the patient
underwent a right nephroureterectomy and removal of ab-
dominal and pelvic masses. A midline incision from the
xiphoid process to the pubic symphysis was made. After
detachment of the right colon and ligature of the right
renal pedicle, a right nephrectomy was performed. Then,
packing of
the operative field with povidone-iodine-
soaked sponges was used. Finally, dissection and resection
of intraperitoneal abdominopelvic cysts were performed.

Gross examination revealed that the renal tumor was
whitish and firm and measured 12x11x6 cm. It showed

patchy areas of hemorrhage and necrosis. The tumoral
capsule was focally ruptured, and the tumor infiltrated
the renal hilum and pelvis (Figure 3). Histologically, it
corresponded to a proliferation of large eosinophils cells,
polygonal or ovoid, with epithelial appearance, associ-
ated with thickened-wall hyalinized vessels, fat cells and
bundles of smooth muscle cells (Figure 4). Mitoses were
estimated at 2 per 50 high-power fields. There was no
nuclear anaplasia, vascular invasion or infiltration of
perirenal fat. One lymph node was found at the renal
hilum and was reactive. In immunohistochemical study,
epithelioid tumor cells expressed melanocytic markers:
S-100 protein and Melan-A (Figure 5). However, they
were negative for anti-pancytokeratin. The diagnosis of
malignant epithelioid AML was made. Gross examination
of the abdominopelvic cysts showed hydatid membranes.
Some of these cysts were calcified (Figure 6). Their wall
was eosinophilic and lamellar, corresponding to the cu-
ticular membrane of hydatid cysts (Figure 7). Thora-
coabdominopelvic CT showed no distant metastasis of
the renal tumor. The patient was lost to follow-up.

Discussion
In this report, we describe a case of a patient with epi-
thelioid AML and hydatid cysts in a 70-year-old woman.
This association was most likely incidental.

Figure 2 Tomodensitometric scans show renal tumor as well as abdominal and pelvic cystic formations. In addition to renal tumor
(A, arrow), tomodensitometric scans reveal abdominal (A, arrow; B) and pelvic (C) cystic formations, some of which are calcified.

Mahdi et al. Journal of Medical Case Reports  (2015) 9:80 

Page 3 of 5

Figure 3 Macroscopic appearance of the renal tumor. The tumor occupied almost the entire kidney. It was whitish, firm and had hemorrhagic
and mucoid rearrangement. It infiltrated the entire renal pelvis and renal hilum.

Renal epithelioid AML was recognized as a new entity
in the 2004 WHO classification of renal tumors. The
first cases were described in 1997 [7]. Additional cases
were described in the following year [2,3,8]. This is a
rare tumor, affecting less than 1 patient per 10,000
population [5]. The number of cases reported in the
literature is relatively small. A Cleveland Clinic group
reported 16 epithelioid AMLs by reviewing 209 AMLs
surgically treated during a 26-year period [9]. The age of
presentation ranged from 25 to 47 years, with a mean of
42 years and with a female predominance (80%) [9].
There are two clinical forms of epithelioid AML—sporadic
and syndromic in association with tuberous sclerosis (TS)
[4,5,9-11]. Our patient had the sporadic form. This tumor
arises from the perivascular epithelial cell (PEC) of the
kidney [2-5,10]. The PEC gives rise to AML by multiplying
and differentiating into smooth muscle cells, adipocytes
and dystrophic vessels [5]. Some AMLs are characterized
by loss of the short arm of chromosome 16 and TS com-
plex 2 (TSC2) gene [1,4,5,10]. TSC2 and TSC1 are tumor
suppressor genes encoding tuberin and hamartin, respect-
ively, and are involved in the pathogenesis of TS [12].

Tuberin and hamartin form an intracellular complex
exerting GTPase-activating activity toward Ras homologue
enriched in brain (Rheb) protein [12]. Inhibition of Rheb
results in inhibition of the mammalian target of rapamycin
(mTOR) pathway [12]. Some AMLs have an oncogenic
mechanism by loss of heterozygosity of the TSC2 gene
with activation of the mTOR pathway [5]. Some AMLs
dedifferentiate into epithelioid AML by loss of p53 [1,5].
This explains why more than half of patients with epitheli-
oid AML have a history of TS [1].

Clinically, patients with sporadic forms of AML are
more often symptomatic than those with syndromic
forms [9]. Some cases are discovered during TS follow-
up [1]. At CT, we distinguish epithelioid AML as low-
fat and isodense to paraspinal muscles [1,5,9] from
classical epithelioid AML, which is isodense to fat [5].
If there is a suspicion of malignancy, or in the context
of TS, thoracoabdominopelvic CT is the gold standard
for staging [5].

Macroscopically,

the tumor is usually >6cm size,
compact, grayish white, and poorly demarcated with
hemorrhagic alterations [1,4,10].
In most cases, no

Figure 4 Representative photomicrograph of the renal tumor. (A) Epithelioid neoplastic cells were globular, eosinophils, ovoid or polygonal,
and had enlarged vesicular nuclei, often with prominent nucleoli (hematoxylin and eosin (H&E) stain; original magnification, ×400). (B) Thick-walled
and hyalinized blood vessels can be observed in this image (H&E stain; original magnification, ×200).

Mahdi et al. Journal of Medical Case Reports  (2015) 9:80 

Page 4 of 5

Figure 5 Immunohistochemical stains of the renal tumor. Epithelioid neoplastic cells are positive for S-100 protein (A) and Melan-A (B).

classical AML areas are observed [4,6,10]. The diagno-
sis is histological, made on the basis of nephrectomy or,
more rarely, on biopsy. The pathologist's role is twofold:
Make diagnosis and search for aggressive histological
criteria.

Histologically, there is a proliferation of round to pol-
ygonal epithelioid cells with abundant and eosinophilic
granular cytoplasm, enlarged vesicular nuclei and often
prominent nucleoli [1,4,6-11]. Multinucleated cells may
be present [1,4,7,8,11], as well as spindle and clear cells
[1,4,6,7,10,11]. Aggressive histological criteria are nuclear
anaplasia, mitotic activity, vascular invasion, necrosis and
infiltration of perinephric fat [1,5]. Usually, no area of
classic AML is observed [4,10,11]. In immunohistochemi-
cal study, tumor cells express melanocytic markers (HMB-
45, Melan-A) [1-3,5-7,10] and variably smooth muscle
markers (smooth muscle actin, muscle-specific actin)
[1-4,6,7] and hormone receptors (estrogen and progester-
one receptors) [4,6]. An important fact is that they do not
express cytokeratin [4,6,7,10].

Epithelioid AML is a benign tumor in two-thirds of
cases and aggressive or malignant
in the remainder
[1,4-6]. Multiple benign sporadic form locations may be

renal or extrarenal [5]. Potentially aggressive forms are
defined by the absence of locoregional invasion or dis-
tant metastases and are characterized by an alteration of
the general state or rapid evolution, aspect of indeter-
minate renal mass on tomodensitometry, a tumor >5cm
and aggressive histological criteria [5]. Malignant forms
are those with a locoregional extension or distant metas-
tases [5]: hepatic, pulmonary, osseous, neurological,
splenic, peritoneal or testicular [1,4-6,10,11].

In our patient, the tumor was epithelioid AML in its
malignant form in view of its size (12 cm), renal hilum
and pelvis infiltration, presence of lymph nodes of the
renal pedicle and interaortocaval regions and mitotic
activity.

The main differential diagnostic consideration is a
renal cell carcinoma (RCC). It may arise in radiological
stage in cases of poor fat epithelioid AML. Conversely,
small amounts of fat can also be found within the bor-
ders of RCCs that invade renal sinus fat and liposarco-
mas [9]. On histological examination, epithelioid cells
and absence of classic AML areas can make diagnosis
difficult. In a retrospective study of five tumors previ-
ously reported as carcinoma, three tumors exhibited a

Figure 6 Gross examination of the cysts. (A) Gross examination of the abdominopelvic cysts revealed multiple daughter cysts. (B) Some of
these cysts were calcified.

Mahdi et al. Journal of Medical Case Reports  (2015) 9:80 

Page 5 of 5

Abbreviations
AML: Angiomyolipoma; CT: Computed tomography; mTOR: Mammalian
target of rapamycin; PEC: Perivascular epithelial cell; RCC: Renal cell
carcinoma; Rheb: Ras homologue enriched in brain; TS: Tuberous sclerosis;
TSC: Tuberous sclerosis complex; WHO: World Health Organization.

Competing interests
The authors declare that they have no competing interests.

Authors’ contributions
YM analyzed and interpreted the patient data, drafted the manuscript and
made the figures. ZB made the histological diagnosis. KZ supervised YM and
revised the manuscript. AI was the surgeon who performed the operation.
AI, YN, ZB, FZ, AJ and NM provided valuable insight during manuscript
preparation. NM supervised the entire work. All authors read and approved
the final manuscript.

Acknowledgments
The authors acknowledge Omar Bouchaara for providing the macroscopic
pictures.

Author details
1Department of Pathology, Ibn Sina University Hospital, Ahmed Balafrej
Avenue, 10000 Rabat, Morocco. 2Department of Urology, Ibn Sina University
Hospital, Ahmed Balafrej Avenue, 10000 Rabat, Morocco. 3Faculty of
Medicine and Pharmacy, Mohammed V Souissi University, Mohamed Belarbi
El Alaoui Avenue, 6203 Rabat, Morocco.

Received: 26 October 2014 Accepted: 21 February 2015

References
1.

Amin MB. Epithelioid angiomyolipoma. In: Eble JN, Sauter G, Epstein JI,
Sesterhenn IA, editors. World Health Organization classification of tumours:
Vol. 7. pathology and genetics of tumours of the urinary system and male
genital organs. 3rd ed. Lyon, France: IARC Press; 2004. p. 68–9.
Pea M, Bonetti F, Martignoni G, Henske EP, Manfrin E, Colato C, et al.
Apparent renal cell carcinomas in tuberous sclerosis are heterogeneous: the
identification of malignant epithelioid angiomyolipoma. Am J Surg Pathol.
1998;22:180–7.

2.

3. Martignoni G, Pea M, Bonetti F, Zamboni G, Carbonara C, Longa L, et al.

Carcinomalike monotypic epithelioid angiomyolipoma in patients without
evidence of tuberous sclerosis: a clinicopathological and genetic study. Am
J Surg Pathol. 1998;22:663–72.
Compérat EV, Vasiliu V, Ferlicot S, Camparo P, Sibony M, Vieillefond A.
[Tumors of the kidneys: new entities]. Ann Pathol. 2005;25:117–33. French.
Lopater J, Daniel L, Akiki A, Boissier R, Lechevallier E, Coulange C. [Renal
epithelioid angiomyolipoma]. Prog Urol. 2009;19:457–61. French.
Sibony M, Vieillefond A. [Non–clear cell renal cell carcinomas: 2008 update
in renal tumor pathology]. Ann Pathol. 2008;28:381–401. French.
Eble JN, Amin MB, Young RH. Epithelioid angiomyolipoma of the kidney: a
report of five cases with a prominent and diagnostically confusing
epithelioid smooth muscle component. Am J Surg Pathol. 1997;21:1123–30.

4.

5.

6.

7.

8. Moch H, Braun OM, Terracciano L, Mihatsch MJ. [Epithelioid

9.

angiomyolipoma of the kidney–a new tumor entity: case report on a tumor
with many multinucleated giant cells]. Pathologe. 1998;19:436–41. German.
Lane BR, Aydin H, Danforth TL, Zhou M, Remer EM, Novick AC, et al. Clinical
correlates of renal angiomyolipoma subtypes in 209 patients: classic, fat
poor, tuberous sclerosis associated and epithelioid. J Urol. 2008;180:836–43.
10. Compérat E, Camparo P, Vieillefond A. [WHO classification 2004: tumors of

11.

12.

the kidneys]. J Radiol. 2006;87:1015–24. French.
Leroy X. [Diagnosis of eosinophilic tumors of the kidney]. Ann Pathol.
2009;29 Spec No 1:S45–8. French.
Jozwiak J. Hamartin and tuberin: Working together for tumour suppression.
Int J Cancer. 2006;118:1–5.

Figure 7 Histological appearance of the abdominopelvic cysts.
The stain shows an eosinophilic and lamellar membrane corresponding
to cuticular membrane of hydatid cysts (hematoxylin and eosin stain;
original magnification, ×200).

phenotype compatible with epithelioid AML [2]. RCC
may be associated with epithelioid AML [9]. In all these
cases,
immunohistochemistry allows the clinician to
clarify the diagnosis by showing epithelial marker nega-
tivity and melanocytic marker positivity.

The management of renal epithelioid AML is based
on radiographic size and associated symptoms [9]. Ac-
tive surveillance can be performed for benign tumors
not exceeding 4cm [5]. To prevent complications, par-
tial nephrectomy is indicated if AMLs exceed 4cm [5].
In the setting of acute hemorrhage, arterial embolization
is the treatment of choice [5,9]. For potentially aggressive
forms, nephrectomy is indicated [5]. Kidney removal
should be total if tumors are >4cm and partial if not [5].
Radical nephrectomy should be indicated for malignant
epithelioid AML with locoregional invasion or distant
metastases [5]. Adjuvant treatment with doxorubicin
appears to be effective in malignant forms with distant
metastases and should be discussed in the case of locore-
gional invasion [5].

Conclusions
In our patient, radiological exploration objectified renal
tumor with locoregional invasion, but it did not lead us to
suspect epithelioid AML under any circumstances. Careful
histological examination and immunohistochemical study
allowed us to make the correct diagnosis of AML in its
malignant form. The association with hydatid cysts is what
makes our case original.

Consent
Written informed consent was obtained from the patient
for publication of this case report and accompanying im-
ages. A copy of the written consent is available for review
by the Editor-in-Chief of this journal.

