Khalil et al. Journal of Medical Case Reports  (2015) 9:61 
DOI 10.1186/s13256-015-0533-8

JOURNAL OF MEDICAL
CASE REPORTS

CA SE R EP O R T
Breast cancer associated with neurofibromatosis
type 1: a case series and review of the literature
Jihane Khalil*, Mohamed Afif*, Hanan Elkacemi, Meryem Benoulaid, Tayeb Kebdani and Noureddine Benjaafar

Open Access

Abstract
Introduction: Neurofibromatosis type 1, also known as Von Recklinghausen’s disease, is a rare neuroectodermal
disease that mainly affects the skin and the nervous system. Patients with neurofibromatosis type 1 have a higher
risk of developing various types of cancers, especially tumors derived from the embryogenic neural crest. However,
its association with breast cancer has seldom been reported.
Case presentation: We report the cases of three white Arabic women diagnosed with neurofibromatosis type 1,
with a median age of 40-years-old (range: 39 to 43), who sought treatment at our centre for breast cancer.
Conclusions: The association between neurofibromatosis type 1 and breast cancer is uncommon. In our case series
we readdress this association through a literature review.
Keywords: Neurofibromatosis, Breast cancer, Uncommon association

Introduction
Neurofibromatosis type 1 (NF1), also known as Von
Recklinghausen’s disease, is a rare neuroectodermal dis-
ease that mainly affects the skin and the nervous system.
It is an autosomal dominant disorder that affects 1 in
3000 individuals [1] and is characterized by cafe-au-lait
spots and multiple neurofibromas. NF1 has been
reported to be associated with various types of cancers,
especially tumors derived from the embryogenic neural
crest,
leukemia, glioma,
rhabdomyosarcoma, astrocytoma and neurofibrosarcoma
[2,3]. Breast cancer is rarely reported in association with
NF1. We report the cases of three white Arabic women
presenting with breast cancer and a previous diagnosis
of NF1, and review the available data in the literature.

including pheochromocytoma,

Case presentation
Case one
A 39-year-old white Arabic woman was referred to our
center for adjuvant radiotherapy of a ductal carcinoma
in her right breast. She was diagnosed with NF1 by her
neurologist when she was eight years old; she was noted
to have several cafe-au-lait spots (Figure 1).

* Correspondence: Jihane.khalil@gmail.com; afifmed@hotmail.com
Radiation Therapy Department, National Cancer Institute, Rabat, Morocco

She had presented with a large lump in the superior
outer quadrant of her right breast one year before her
admission to our department. On palpation, this lump
was noted to be hard and irregular. A mammography
was then performed and suggested the malignancy of
the lesion, as it was staged as stage 4 according to the
Breast Imaging Reporting and Data System (BI-RADS)
established by the American College of Radiology
(ACR). Her biopsy was positive for invasive ductal car-
cinoma and her additional work-up was negative for dis-
tant metastasis via bone scan, chest and abdominal
computed tomography (CT).

A mastectomy, along with a right axillary lymph node
dissection, were performed and the tumor was classified
as stage PT3N2M0(IIIA) according to the TNM Staging
System for Breast Cancer adopted by the American Joint
Committee on Cancer (AJCC), (luminal B, estrogen re-
ceptor [ER] positive, progesterone receptor [PR] positive
and human epidermal growth factor [HER] 2 positive).
She received adjuvant chemotherapy (three courses of
FEC (cyclophosphamide, epirubicin and 5-fluorouracil)
followed by three courses of docetaxel with trastuzumab
(Herceptin®) three weeks after her surgery. Radiotherapy
was delivered to her chest wall and regional nodes to a
total dose of 42Gy after completion of chemotherapy.
She was started on adjuvant tamoxifen (20mg, orally)
immediately after radiation and was asked to continue

© 2015 Khalil et al.; licensee BioMed Central. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and
reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly credited. The Creative Commons Public Domain
Dedication waiver (http://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/) applies to the data made available in this article,
unless otherwise stated.

Khalil et al. Journal of Medical Case Reports  (2015) 9:61 

Page 2 of 4

With no family history of breast cancer, she was diag-
nosed at 40-years-old with cancer of her left breast. Her
mammography showed an irregular 8cm lump in the
retro-areolar area, classified as stage ACR5. A biopsy of
the lesion confirmed its malignancy, and the histological
type was invasive ductal carcinoma.

tumor was classified as

After the weekly team board meeting, a radical mast-
ectomy with homolateral axillary nodes dissection was
recommended. Her
stage
PT3N3M0 (IIIC), according to the pathologic findings,
and it was a triple negative. An adjuvant chemotherapy
and radiotherapy was delivered. She received three cy-
cles of anthracycline followed by three cycles of doce-
taxel. Radiation therapy was delivered to her left chest
wall along with regional lymph nodes to a total dose of
42Gy. At 30 months after her mastectomy she exhibits
no evidence of recurrence.

Case three
We present
the case of a 43-year-old white Arabic
woman whose diagnosis of NF1 was made soon after
birth, when she was noted to have numerous cafe-au-lait
spots and progressively developed axillary lentigines and
neurofibromatous lesions on her trunk and limbs. At 43
years old she noted a mobile lump in her upper internal
left breast quadrant upon self-examination. A biopsy
was taken and tested positive for invasive ductal carcin-
oma. She received the same treatment as patients in
cases one and two as her tumor was also classified as
stage PT3N2M0 (IIIA). Adjuvant systemic hormonal
therapy was prescribed for five years as she was ER and
PR positive. At two years after her mastectomy she re-
mains free of any local recurrence or distal metastasis.

Discussion
NF1 is a complex neuroectodermal disorder character-
ized by its autosomal dominant inheritance, high pene-
trance and a wide variability in expression. The NF1
gene is located in the peri-centromeric region of the
long arm of chromosome 17 (which also houses the
BRCA1 gene). It regulates the conversion of the active
Ras-GTP to inactive Ras-GDP. Ras is known as an es-
sential component of signal transduction pathways that
regulate growth, proliferation, differentiation, and apop-
tosis. The conversion from the GTP- to the GDP-bound
form is mediated by the intrinsic GTPase activity of Ras.
The impairment of this hydrolytic reaction is associated
with an increased risk of cancer [3]. Hence,
it has a
potential role as a tumor suppressor gene [4]. The asso-
ciation between NF1 and malignant tumors has been
widely described; the most common reported associa-
tions are with gliomas, malignant peripheral nerve
sheath tumors (MPNST), leukemia and rhabdomyosar-
coma [2,3]. Concerning the association between NF1

Figure 1 Case one: photograph of café-au-lait spots.

this treatment for five years. After 28 months, she re-
mains well with no signs of recurrence of her breast
cancer.

Case two
A white Arabic 40-year-old woman presented to our
center with cancer of her left breast. She was diagnosed
as having NF1 at seven years of age; she had the classical
form of neurofibromatosis, with multiple nerofibromas
over her limbs and trunk (Figure 2).

Figure 2 Case two: photograph of neurofibromas in the trunk
and the limbs after mastectomy.

Khalil et al. Journal of Medical Case Reports  (2015) 9:61 

Page 3 of 4

and breast cancer, only a few cases have been reported
[5,6]. Interestingly, about 28% of sporadic breast cancers
are missing at least one copy of the NF1 gene, either due
to deletion or mutation [7].

Clinically, NF1 is recognized mostly by multiple
neurofibromas, café-au-lait spots and Lisch nodules
[2,3]. The National Institutes of Health in the United
States defined seven eligible criteria by which to diag-
nose NF1; the diagnosis of NF1 is established when-
ever two signs are associated in the same individual
(Table 1) [8].

The first cases describing the association of NF1 with
breast cancer were reported in the 1970s by Brasfield
and Das Gupta. They described their experience with
five patients,
including one who had bilateral breast
cancer [9].

Since then many case reports have been published.
Murayama et al. [10] reported 37 cases of breast cancer
associated with NF1; most of the cases were diagnosed
at an advanced stage and had invasive ductal carcinoma.
The authors explained the advanced stage at the diagno-
sis by the presence of cutaneous fibromatas in the trunk
in most of the patients which could have delayed the
early diagnosis. In our cases, breast cancer was diag-
nosed at an advanced stage in all of our patients (stage
IIIA in two cases and IIIC in one case).

In an earlier report by Nakamura et al. [5], the authors
noted that breast cancer affected young women (<35
years old), in 18.5% of the cases which is relatively high
when compared to the findings of other series of breast
cancer not associated with NF1, which reported a per-
centage of 6.7%. In our patients, breast cancer was also
diagnosed at a young age (median age of 40 years old).

In a study of Sharif et al. [11], the main objective was
to evaluate the risk of developing breast cancer among
patients with NF1. A cohort of 304 women aged 20 years
and above who were diagnosed with NF1 was studied
over a period of 30 years. The authors reached the

Table 1 Diagnostic criteria for neurofibromatosis type 1
according to the National Institutes of Health [8]
Diagnostic criteria for neurofibromatosis type 1
1. Six or more café-au-lait macules over 5mm in diameter in prepubertal

individuals and over 15mm in diameter in postpubertal individuals.

2. Two or more neurofibromas of any type or one plexiform

neurofibroma.

3. Freckling in the axillary or inguinal region.

4. Optic glioma.

5. Two or more Lisch nodules (iris hamartomas).

6. A distinctive osseous lesion such as sphenoid dysplasia or thinning

of the long bone cortex with or without pseudarthrosis.

7. A first-degree relative (parent, sibling or offspring) with

neurofibromatosis type 1 as diagnosed by the above criteria.

conclusion that women with NF1 had five times more
chances of developing breast cancer when compared to
the general population. Concluding that, although re-
ported cases are rare, the association between breast
cancer and NF1 is common and patients with NF1 have
a moderately elevated risk of developing breast cancer
[11]. Despite these findings, patients with NF1 are still
not stratified as high-risk patients, and current guide-
lines do not give specific considerations regarding any
screening program for this category of patients [12,13].

Treatment of this particular population with breast
cancer is conflicting. Even if a conservative approach is
considered to be convenient, there have been reports of
an increased risk of developing fibrosarcoma secondary
to radiation therapy when indicated [14,15]. Addition-
ally, silencing the NF1 gene has been shown to confer
tamoxifen resistance in human breast cancer (MCF7)
cell lines [16]. Hence, there is a growing hypothesis that
tamoxifen might be less effective in cancers involving
NF1 mutations; however, clinical evidence is missing.

As for the general population with breast cancer,
women with NF1 can also be candidates for breast re-
construction following surgery.
In the literature we
found a case report by Yamamoto [17] in which a 33-
year-old woman had undergone reconstructive surgery
using the abdominal rectus muscle.

Conclusions
Even if the association between breast cancer and NF1 is
rarely reported, the few studies found in the literature
suggest that women with NF1 are at a higher risk of
developing breast cancer when compared to the general
population. However, there are no specific consider-
ations for screening in this particular population. More-
over, cancer management in this population is not well
defined; especially when some available data suggests
that the risks of fibrosarcomas are increased by radiation
when a conservative approach is chosen for
this
population.

Consent
Written informed consent was obtained from the
patients for publication of this case report and any ac-
companying images. A copy of the written consent is
available for
this
journal.

review by the Editor-in-Chief of

Abbreviations
NF1: Neurofibromatosis; BIRADS: Breast imaging reporting and data system;
AJCC: American joint committee on cancer; E.R.: Estrogen receptor;
P.R.: Progesterone receptor; HER: Human epidermal growth factor;
MPNST: Malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumors.

Competing interests
The authors declare that they have no competing interests.

Khalil et al. Journal of Medical Case Reports  (2015) 9:61 

Page 4 of 4

Authors’ contributions
MA and MB treated one of the reported cases and contributed to the
literature review. HE and NB corrected the manuscript before submission. TK
participated in its design and coordination and helped to draft the manuscript.
All authors read and approved the final manuscript.

Received: 12 October 2014 Accepted: 28 January 2015

References
1.

2.

3.

4.

5.

Gokalp G, Hakyemez B. Myxoid neurofibromas of the breast: mammographical,
sonographical and MRI appearances. Br J Radiol. 2007;80:234–7.
Ricardi VM. Neurofibromatosids, phenotype, natural history and
pathogenesis. Baltimore: John Hopkins University Press; 1992.
Perry A, Roth KA, Benerjee R, Fuller CE, Gutman DH. NF1 deletions in s-100
protein positive and negative cells of sporadic and neurofibromatosis 1
(NF1) associated plexiform neurofibromas and peripheral nerve sheath
tumors. Am J Pathol. 2001;159:57–61.
Xu GF, O’Connell P, Viskochil D, Cawthon R, Robertson M, Culver M, et al.
The neurofibromatosis type 1 gene encodes a protein related to GAP. Cell.
1990;62:599–608.
Nakamura M, Tangoku A, Kusanagi H, Oka M, Suzuki T. Breast cancer
associated with Recklinghousen’s disease: report of a case. Nippon Geka
Hokan. 1998;67:3–9.

6. Wallace MD, Pfefferle AD, Shen L, McNairn AJ, Cerami EG, Fallon BL, et al.

Comparative oncogenomics implicates the neurofibromin 1 gene (NF1) as a
breast cancer driver. Genetics. 2012;192:385–96.
Gurana S, Safali M. A case of neurofibromatosis and breast cancer: loss of
heterozygosity of NF1 in breast cancer. Cancer Genet Cytogenet.
2005;156:86–8.
Office of Communications and Public Liaison, National Institute of
Neurologic Disorders, National Institutes of Health. Neurofibromatosis Fact
Sheet. 2006.
RD B, DAs Gupta TK. Von Recklinghausen’s Disease: A Clinicopathological
Study. Ann Surg Jan. 1972;175:1.

7.

8.

9.

11.

10. Murayama Y, Yamamoto Y, Shimojima N, Takahara T, Kikuchi K, Iida S, et al.
T1 breast cancer associated with von Recklinghausen’s neurofibromatosis.
Breast Cancer. 1999;6:227.
Sharif S, Moran A, Huson SM, Iddenden R, Shenton A, Howard E, et al.
Women with neurofibromatosis 1 are at a moderately increased risk of
developing breast cancer and should be considered for early screening.
J Med Genet. 2007;44(8):481–4. Epub 2007 Mar 16.
Senkus E, Kyriakides S, Penault-Llorca F, Poortmans P, Thompson A, Zackrisson
S et al. Primary breast cancer: ESMO Clinical Practice Guidelines for diagnosis,
treatment and follow-up
Theriault RL, Carlson RW, Allred C, Giordano SH, Fred Hutchinson BO,
Burstein HJ et al. NCCN Clinical Practice Guidelines in Oncology. Breast
Cancer. Version 4. 2014.

14. Chu JY, O’Connor DM, Danis RK. Neurofibrosarcoma at irradiation site in a

12.

13.

patient with neurofibromatosis and Wilms’ tumor. CA Cancer J Clin.
1981;31:333.

15. Ducatman BS, Scheithauer BW. Postirradiation neurofibrosarcoma. Cancer.

1983;51:1028.

16. Mendes-Pereira AMD, Sims T, Dexter K, Fenwick K, Assiotis I, Kozarewa I,
et al. Genome-wide functional screen identifies a compendium of genes
affecting sensitivity to tamoxifen. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2012;109:2730–5.

17. Yamamoto Y, Kanazawa H, Sugihara T. Breast reconstruction in the von

Recklinghausen disease patient. Plast Reconstr Surg. 2002;110:357.

Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central
and take full advantage of: 

• Convenient online submission

• Thorough peer review

• No space constraints or color ﬁgure charges

• Immediate publication on acceptance

• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar

• Research which is freely available for redistribution

Submit your manuscript at 
www.biomedcentral.com/submit

