Dhakal et al. Journal of Medical Case Reports  (2015) 9:72 
DOI 10.1186/s13256-015-0543-6

JOURNAL OF MEDICAL
CASE REPORTS

CA SE R EP O R T
Open Access
Tuberculosis presenting as multiple intramuscular
nodules in a child: a case report
Ajaya Kumar Dhakal1*, Subhash Chandra Shah1, Devendra Shrestha1, Niroj Banepali2 and Geetika KC3

Abstract

Introduction: Tuberculosis is a global health problem that mostly affects people in developing countries. Tuberculosis
can occur in various organ systems and may present with diverse manifestations in the same system. Primary muscular
tuberculosis is a very rare condition in both adults and children, and tuberculosis of various muscle groups presenting
as intramuscular nodules is an even more uncommon presentation.
Case presentation: A 9-year-old Asian girl presented with multiple painless, gradually progressive swellings over different
parts of her body for 3 months with no history of contact with tuberculosis. A physical examination was normal except
for multiple swellings in her right forearm, a single swelling in her interscapular region and multiple swellings in her right
calf. Ultrasonography of swellings revealed multiple nodules in the intramuscular layer. Excisional biopsies performed from
two different sites revealed swellings in muscular layers and histopathology showed granulomatous inflammation
with caseous necrosis consistent with tuberculosis. The child was started on antitubercular therapy after which
the swellings resolved; she was kept on regular follow up.
Conclusions: Intramuscular nodules in multiple muscular sites may be the presenting symptoms of tuberculosis
of the muscles. Tuberculosis of skeletal muscles should be considered in a differential diagnosis when presented
with single or multiple masses even when a chest X-ray is normal and there is no evidence of tubercular foci
elsewhere in the body.
Keywords: Intramuscular nodules, Skeletal muscle tuberculosis, Tubercular muscular nodules, Tuberculosis

Introduction
Tuberculosis is a public health problem throughout the
world and a significant cause of mortality and morbidity
in both adults and children in developing as well as de-
veloped nations [1]. The large number of tuberculosis-
related deaths and morbidity can be prevented with early
diagnosis and timely intervention with antitubercular ther-
apy [1]. Tuberculosis can affect most organs/systems of
the human body and its clinical manifestations in each
system are diverse. Sometimes tuberculosis occurs at un-
usual sites with unusual presentations simulating other
medical illness causing diagnostic difficulties [2]. A high
index of suspicion and early detection of these uncommon
types of tuberculosis may lead to better outcomes.

Tuberculosis of muscles is a very rare form of extra-
pulmonary tuberculosis which manifests with different

* Correspondence: ajayakdhakal@gmail.com
1Department of Paediatrics, KIST Medical College Teaching Hospital, Imadol,
Lalitpur, Nepal
Full list of author information is available at the end of the article

presentations such as isolated muscle mass [3], tubercular
myositis [4], isolated muscular abscess [5] and tubercular
pyomyositis [6]. Tuberculosis of muscles presenting as
intramuscular nodules in different parts of the body is an
extremely rare form of muscular tuberculosis and hence
reported here.

Case presentation
A 9-year-old Asian girl presented to our paediatric clinic
with complaints of multiple swellings in her forearm, calf
and back for 3 months which were painless and gradually
progressive in nature. There was no history of
fever,
trauma, joint pain, rashes, prolonged cough, decreased ap-
petite, weight loss as well as no known or traceable history
of contact with tuberculosis. On examination her weight
and height were appropriate for her age. There were no
signs of pallor,
icterus, generalized lymphadenopathy,
rashes, discharging sinus or features suggestive of osteo-
myelitis and joint involvement. The systemic examination
was unremarkable except for presenting swellings. There

© 2015 Dhakal et al.; licensee BioMed Central. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and
reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly credited. The Creative Commons Public Domain
Dedication waiver (http://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/) applies to the data made available in this article,
unless otherwise stated.

Dhakal et al. Journal of Medical Case Reports  (2015) 9:72 

Page 2 of 5

Figure 1 Photograph of swellings. A. Interscapular region. B. Forearm. C and D. Right calf.

was a small swelling in her back which was 1.5cm×1.5cm
(Figure 1A), swellings in her right forearm (Figure 1B) and
multiple swellings in her right calf (Figure 1C and D) of
varying size which were soft, raised, nontender, mobile,
not fixed with skin and had normal overlying skin.

On investigation her haemoglobin was 11.1gm/dL with
normocytic normochromic red blood cells morphology.
Her platelet count was 320000/mm3 and total white blood
cells count was 8300/mm3 with neutrophil 66%, lympho-
cytes 29%, and eosinophils 5%. Her erythrocyte sedimen-
tation rate was 26mm/hour. There were no atypical cells
and parasites in a peripheral smear. The results of renal,
liver function tests and stool examination were normal. A
radiological investigation showed normal chest X-ray and
limbs radiography for osteomyelitis was negative and there
were no calcifications in chest and limb radiographs. A

Mantoux test revealed no induration after 72 hours.
Ultrasonography of her swellings revealed well-defined
hypoechoic intramuscular lesions of which the largest
measured 2.4cm×1.7cm and there were also a few calci-
fications and cystic degeneration in some of the lesions
(Figure 2). Abdominal ultrasonography revealed normal
findings except for a hyperechoic space-occupying lesion
on the right lobe of her liver measuring 1.6cm×1.3cm
suggesting hemangioma. Ultrasound-guided fine-needle
aspiration cytology (FNAC) of the swelling revealed fea-
tures suggestive of parasitic cysts based on the finding
of bluish fibrillary structures with interspersed small nuclei
in a background of mixed inflammatory cells consisting
of neutrophils, eosinophils, lymphocytes and histiocytes.
Acid-fast bacilli staining of aspirate was negative for tuber-
cular bacilli and aspirate culture was also negative. An

Figure 2 Ultrasonography of swellings. A. Well-defined hypoechoic nodules measuring 1.7cm×2.4cm were seen in the calf muscle. There were
associated echogenic foci seen in the centre of the lesion suggesting calcification. B. On colour Doppler minimal peripheral vascularity was noted.

Dhakal et al. Journal of Medical Case Reports  (2015) 9:72 

Page 3 of 5

specimen and tissue culture of biopsy specimen for tu-
berculosis revealed no tubercular bacilli. There were no
characteristic histopathological findings of neurocysti-
cercosis, filarial infections, hydatid cysts of muscles and
sarcoidosis on both biopsy specimens. Based on her his-
tory, clinical examination and biopsy report from two dif-
ferent sites showing granulomatous inflammation with
caseous necrosis suggestive of tuberculosis plus high
prevalence of tubercular infection, diagnosis of tubercu-
lar infection was made. She was started on an antitubercular
regimen according to National Tuberculosis Programme of
Nepal and all the swellings resolved during the intensive
phase and she is now on the continuation phase of the
antitubercular regimen.

Discussion
Primary muscular tuberculosis is a very uncommon condi-
tion in both children and adults [7]. Current knowledge
about these conditions is mainly based on case reports be-
cause the precise incidence of this disease is not known. A
study found four cases of tuberculosis of muscles out of
2224 autopsies performed on patients with a history of tu-
berculosis [8]. Moreover another study reported one case
of primary muscular tuberculosis out of 6180 patients
with different forms of tuberculosis [9]. Similarly, 20 cases
of muscular tuberculosis were found in a study from
China over the period of 10 years of which only one case
out of 20 presented with mass in multiple muscles
whereas most of the patients had mass in a single muscle

Figure 3 Photomicrograph of excisional biopsy of nodule from
interscapular region. Several well-formed granulomas embedded
among the muscle fibres (hematoxylin and eosin stain, ×50).

excision biopsy of the swelling from her interscapular re-
gion was performed. Intraoperatively the swelling was lo-
cated in the muscular layer and histopathology showed
features of granulomatous inflammation with caseous ne-
crosis, consistent with tuberculosis (Figures 3 and 4) but
the result for serum cysticercus immunoglobulin G anti-
bodies was 2.23 (positive>1.1). An excision biopsy was re-
peated again at a different site from her right forearm
after 10 days due to dubious diagnosis which also showed
swelling located in the muscular layer and it also showed
features of tuberculosis in histopathology (Figures 5 and 6).
However, the geneXpert MTB-RIF assay from the biopsy

Figure 4 Photomicrograph of excisional biopsy of nodule from interscapular region. A. Giant cells and epithelioid granuloma (hematoxylin
and eosin stain, ×100). B. Inset showing central caseous necrosis surrounded by epithelioid cells, lymphocytes and plasma cells in higher magnification
(hematoxylin and eosin stain, ×400).

Dhakal et al. Journal of Medical Case Reports  (2015) 9:72 

Page 4 of 5

Figure 5 Photomicrograph of excisional biopsy of nodule from forearm. A. Several well-formed granulomas with caseous necrosis (hematoxylin
and eosin stain, ×50). B. Inset showing central caseous necrosis surrounded by epithelioid cells, lymphocytes and plasma cells (hematoxylin and eosin
stain, ×400).

[10]. Tuberculosis of muscle presenting as swelling has
been mostly reported to present as a mass in a single
muscle [3,10]. However, recently skeletal muscle tubercu-
losis simultaneously involving multiple sites presenting as
multiple muscle masses in different parts of the body
has also been reported from India [7]. These case reports
highlight the uncommon nature of these conditions.

The rare occurrence of skeletal muscle tuberculosis
has been hypothesised to be due to “high lactic acid con-
tent of muscles, high vascularity and blood flow, absence
of reticuloendothelial and lymphatic tissue and the highly
differentiated state of muscle tissue” which inhibit the
growth of Mycobacterium [11]. The child was diagnosed

Figure 6 Photomicrograph of excisional biopsy of nodule from
forearm. Giant cells and epithelioid granuloma (hematoxylin and
eosin stain, ×100).

as a case of tuberculosis of muscles based on clinical
examination, presence of multiple swellings in muscles
on ultrasonography, intraoperative finding of swelling
in muscular layer, caseating granuloma on histopathology
consistent with tuberculosis and rapid clinical response
to antitubercular therapy. However, there was no history
of contact with tuberculosis and a Mantoux test was
negative. It must be highlighted that in previous studies
[3,7,10] most of the patients were diagnosed as muscular
tuberculosis with muscle biopsy and very few of these
cases had a positive Mantoux test. In one study of muscu-
lar tuberculosis out of 11 patients who underwent a puri-
fied protein derivative (PPD) test only one was strongly
positive while the other 10 were negative [10].

Tubercular involvement of the muscles has been pos-
tulated to be the result of haematogenous dissemination
of tubercular lesions on lungs [4,12], contagious trans-
mission from an underlying structure like tuberculosis of
the bones, tubercular arthritis and synovial lining [4], or
without evidence of active foci of tuberculosis elsewhere
in the body or osseous involvement [3] and direct trau-
matic inoculation [4]. The presence of multiple swellings
in different parts of the body with normal examination
of bone and no evidence of bone involvement in radiog-
raphy makes the possibility of contagious transmission
from an underlying structure less likely in this patient.
There were no symptoms of cough, fever, loss of appetite
and weight loss along with normal chest X-ray suggest-
ing absence of active foci of pulmonary tuberculosis. It
has been suggested that in an area with high incidence

Dhakal et al. Journal of Medical Case Reports  (2015) 9:72 

Page 5 of 5

accompanying images. A copy of the written consent is
available for review by the Editor-in-Chief of this journal.

Competing interests
The authors declare that they have no competing interests.

Authors’ contributions
AKD conceived the idea of the case report, searched the literature and wrote
the initial draft of the manuscript. SCS helped in literature search and drafting
of the manuscript. DS helped in drafting the manuscript and literature search.
NB was involved in the literature search and draft of the manuscript. GKC
helped to review histopathological slides, draft the manuscript and literature
search. AKD, SCS, DS and NB were involved in the treatment of the patient.
All the authors read and approved the final manuscript.

Acknowledgements
The authors would like to thank Dr Bijaya Kumar Dhakal, Clinical Microbiologist,
University of Utah, for helping in preparation of this manuscript.

Author details
1Department of Paediatrics, KIST Medical College Teaching Hospital, Imadol,
Lalitpur, Nepal. 2Department of Surgery, KIST Medical College Teaching
Hospital, Imadol, Lalitpur, Nepal. 3Department of Pathology, KIST Medical
College Teaching Hospital, Imadol, Lalitpur, Nepal.

Received: 15 October 2014 Accepted: 12 February 2015

References
1. World Health Organization. Global Tuberculosis Report 2013. Geneva:

2.

World Health Organization; 2013.
Al-Tawfiq JA. Multifocal systemic tuberculosis: the many faces of an old
nemesis. Med Sci Monit. 2007;13(4):Cs56–60.
Sokucu S, Sokucu SN, Kabukcuoglu Y, Kabukcuoglu F. Primary skeletal
muscle tuberculosis at an unusual site. J Pak Med Assoc. 2013;63(1):126–8.
4. Wang JY, Lee LN, Hsueh PR, Shih JY, Chang YL, Yang PC, et al. Tuberculous

3.

myositis: a rare but existing clinical entity. Rheumatology (Oxford).
2003;42(7):836–40.
Sabat D, Kumar V. Primary tuberculous abscess of rectus femoris muscle:
a case report. J Infect Dev Ctries. 2009;3(6):476–8.
Arora S, Sabat D, Sural S, Dhal A. Isolated tuberculous pyomyositis of
semimembranosus and adductor magnus: a case report. Orthop Surg.
2012;4(4):266–8.
Neogi DS, Bandekar SM, Chawla L. Skeletal muscle tuberculosis simultaneously
involving multiple sites. J Pediatr Orthop B. 2013;22(2):167–9.
Culotta A. La-tuberculosis muscuolare. Rev Pathol Tuberc. 1929;3:1–26.
Petter CK. Some thoughts on tuberculosis of fascia and muscle. Lancet.
1937;57:156–9.

5.

6.

7.

8.
9.

10. Gou LJ, Su JM, Zhao Y, Zhang FC. Clinical analysis of 20 cases of muscular

tuberculosis. Zhonghua Yi Xue Za Zhi. 2012;92(3):206–8.

11. Plummer WW, Sanes S, Smith WS. Skeletal muscle tuberculosis. J Bone Joint

Surg. 1934;16:631–9.
Katz R, Herman MA, Katz S. Tuberculosis of muscle. JAMA. 1964;190(5):472–3.
12.
13. Yadav YK, Gupta O, Aggarwal R. Cytological diagnosis of parasites presenting as
superficial nodular swelling: report of 35 cases. J Parasit Dis. 2012;36(1):106–11.
Jayaraman T, Prabhakaran V, Babu P, Raghava MV, Rajshekhar V, Dorny P, et al.
Relative seroprevalence of cysticercus antigens and antibodies and antibodies
to Taenia ova in a population sample in south India suggests immunity against
neurocysticercosis. Trans R Soc Trop Med Hyg. 2011;105(3):153–9.

14.

of tuberculosis, muscular tuberculosis should be con-
sidered strongly when clinical features like muscular pain
and swelling are present even though a chest X-ray is nor-
mal and there is no evidence of active foci of tuberculosis
elsewhere in the body [5]. The pathogenesis for multiple
intramuscular swellings in this patient with no evidence
of active foci of tuberculosis elsewhere could only be ex-
plained by reactivation of latent tubercular bacilli at the
state of reduced immunity during the active growth period
of the child, which had lodged in muscle during period of
lymphohematogenous spread of primary tuberculosis [2,7].
Neurocysticercosis, hydatid cyst of muscles and filarial
infections are common causes of superficial palpable mul-
tiple nodular swellings in different parts of a body [13].
These diseases were ruled out based on clinical features
and histopathological finding of caseating granuloma,
absence of scolex of cysticercus, absence of cyst and
fragments of acellular lamellate membrane of Echinococcus
and absence of microfilaria including absence of eosino-
phils in the biopsy specimens of this patient. However
serum IgG antibody for cysticercus was positive, which
might be due to high exposure of cysticercus parasite in
the general population. One of the studies from the
South East Asian region found Taenia cysticercus anti-
gens in 4.5% and positive cysticercus IgG antibodies in
15.9% of the asymptomatic population [14]. The FNAC
of swelling of this patient demonstrated findings sug-
gestive of parasitic cyst which were inconclusive in de-
termining specific parasitic infections. In a study done
on 361 patients presenting with superficial nodular swell-
ing, FNAC found 35 cases suggestive of parasitic infest-
ation; however, only 14 of these cases could be definitely
diagnosed as parasitic cyst by FNAC alone and the rest of
the cases required biopsy [13]. In this patient also, final
diagnosis was achieved with biopsy of swellings.

The limitation of this case report is that magnetic reson-
ance imaging (MRI) of the soft tissue could not be per-
formed to confirm that all the masses are from muscular
tissue because of the unavailability of MRI in our centre
and cost factors. However, ultrasonography and intraoper-
ative findings were conclusive of intramuscular lesions.

Conclusions
Tuberculosis is a common infection in the developing
world and a high index of suspicion of skeletal muscle
tuberculosis should be kept in mind with a patient pre-
senting with multiple swellings in different parts of his
or her body in an endemic area. The diagnosis could be
achieved with history and clinical examination supported
by appropriate investigations and histopathology.

Consent
Written informed consent was obtained from the parent
of the patient for publication of this Case Report and any

