Yin et al. Journal of Medical Case Reports  (2015) 9:74 
DOI 10.1186/s13256-015-0548-1

JOURNAL OF MEDICAL
CASE REPORTS

CA SE R EP O R T
Open Access
Laryngeal tuberculosis diagnosed by stool sample
cultures: a case report
Nicolas Yin1, Marion Delord1, Antoine Giovanni2, Jean del Grande3, Michel Drancourt4, Philippe Brouqui1,4
and Jean-Christophe Lagier1,4*

Abstract

Introduction: Laryngeal tuberculosis is a rare and often misdiagnosed disease. Its diagnosis is based on the
association of a laryngeal lesion and the microbiological detection of Mycobacterium tuberculosis. Stool cultures
have recently been described as a useful tool in the diagnosis of atypical forms of tuberculosis. In this report, we
describe the first case in the literature of laryngeal tuberculosis diagnosed by culture of stool samples.
Case presentation: A 41-year-old French Caucasian man was admitted to our hospital for dysphonia of 3 months’
evolution. A laryngeal biopsy was performed because of suspicion of carcinoma. He had no clinical signs of
tuberculosis. The biopsy showed a caseating granuloma suggestive of laryngeal tuberculosis. The diagnosis was
finally confirmed by stool cultures, whereas sputum cultures remained sterile for M. tuberculosis.
Conclusions: This case confirms the importance of stool cultures in the diagnosis of tuberculosis, especially for
patients with uncommon presentations.
Keywords: Diagnostic test, Dysphonia, Laryngeal tuberculosis, Stool culture

Introduction
Laryngeal tuberculosis is a rare form of clinical presenta-
tion of tuberculosis in Western Europe, where it ac-
counts for less than 1% of cases [1,2]. Frequently,
symptoms are limited to dysphonia or odynophagia, and
the usual symptoms of tuberculosis, such as fever, cough
and night sweats, are absent [1,2]. In many published
cases, a diagnosis of carcinoma was suspected first and
then rejected after the observation of caseating granu-
loma in histological analysis [3]. The microbiological
confirmation is obtained by culture and smear micros-
copy of sputum. In recent years, analytical tools for use
with stool samples with smear microscopy, culture and
polymerase chain reaction (PCR) have been developed,
effectively replacing gastric aspiration in patients with
pulmonary tuberculosis [4,5]. In this report, we present
a case of a 41-year-old man with laryngeal tuberculosis
whose microbiological diagnosis was obtained by stool

* Correspondence: jean-christophe.lagier@ap-hm.fr
1Assistance Publique-Hôpitaux de Marseille, CHU Nord, Pôle Infectieux,
Institut Hospitalo-Universitaire Méditerranée Infection, 13015 Marseille, France
4Aix Marseille Université, URMITE, UMR63, CNRS 7278, IRD 198, Inserm 1095,
Marseille, France
Full list of author information is available at the end of the article

culture while sputum and bronchial washing cultures
remained negative.

Case presentation
A 41-year-old French Caucasian man consulted an ear,
nose and throat specialist for dysphonia of 3 months’
evolution that was associated with persistent asthenia.
He had been given the Bacillus Calmette–Guérin vaccine
and had had a limit tuberculin skin test of 10mm 20
years before presentation. No immunosuppressive treat-
ment had ever been prescribed, and his serological status
for HIV and hepatitis was negative. The patient reported
no fever, night sweats or significant weight loss. His clin-
ical examination was normal, excepting dysphonia with-
out cough or dyspnea. His dysphonia was characterized
by hoarseness and a loss of voice concomitant with in-
creasing asthenia. A laryngoscopy examination revealed
an ulcerated lesion of the posterior part of the left vocal
cord with a suspected malignant macroscopic aspect.
Histological analysis of a laryngeal biopsy showed in-
tense acute inflammatory lesions associated with tuber-
culoid granuloma without carcinoma (Figure 1). The
patient was then admitted to the hospital.

© 2015 Yin et al.; licensee BioMed Central. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and
reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly credited. The Creative Commons Public Domain
Dedication waiver (http://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/) applies to the data made available in this article,
unless otherwise stated.

Yin et al. Journal of Medical Case Reports  (2015) 9:74 

Page 2 of 3

showed susceptibility to rifampicin,
isoniazid, etham-
butol, pyrazinamide and streptomycin. Consequently,
the patient was treated with an antibiotic regimen associ-
ating rifampicin (10mg/kg/day),
isoniazid (5mg/kg/day),
pyrazinamide (30mg/kg/day) and ethambutol (20mg/kg/
day) for 2 months, then rifampicin (10mg/kg/day) and
isoniazid (5mg/kg/day) for 4 months. After 5 months of
well-tolerated treatment, the patient totally recovered.

Discussion
In our patient, as in many cases of laryngeal tuberculosis
previously described [1-3], the diagnosis was delayed be-
cause of the unusual clinical presentation. No symptom
of pulmonary tuberculosis was present, and dysphonia
was isolated. In a review, Benwill et al. showed that
dysphonia is the main common symptom, followed by
weight loss [1]. Tobacco smoking and alcoholism are
frequent comorbidities [1]. This clinical presentation is
frequently confounding, especially in developed coun-
tries, where the first suspected diagnosis is carcinoma in
cases with such clinical involvement [3]. Moreover, the
endoscopic aspect is not specific in many cases. In our
patient, histological analysis guided the diagnosis, but as
tuberculosis had not been suspected, neither surgical bi-
opsy nor peripheral samples were analyzed in the micro-
biology laboratory before the histological results were
obtained. The biopsy was fixed with the procedure used
for carcinoma, which decreased the chance of identifying
mycobacteria. Retrospective detection of M. tuberculosis
on vocal cord biopsy by PCR and Ziehl–Neelsen staining
remained unsuccessful.

A pure culture remains essential

to test antibiotic
susceptibility, especially because of the appearance of
multidrug-resistant tuberculosis [6]. Recent progress in
culture media and culture conditions have successfully ac-
celerated mycobacterial diagnosis [7,8]. The optimization
of blood agar media using different compounds, such as
egg lecithin and the addition of ascorbic acid, has a
growth-promoting effect [7]. The use of microaerophilic
conditions and the detection of microcolonies using auto-
fluorescence succeeded in dramatically decreasing the cul-
ture time of M. tuberculosis [7].

In parallel, to improve the diagnosis of tuberculosis, we
used systematically a diagnostic kit developed in our la-
boratory [9] with which we simultaneously collected spu-
tum and stool samples during a 3-day period. Indeed, in
this case, although chest CT suggested lung tuberculosis,
M. tuberculosis was not detected in respiratory tract sam-
ples, including samples obtained by bronchial washing.
The microbiological diagnosis was only performed be-
cause of the positive culture on two stool samples with
identification confirmed by PCR. To the best of our know-
ledge, this case constitutes the first case in the literature of
laryngeal tuberculosis diagnosed microbiologically by stool

Figure 1 Hematoxylin phloxine saffron stain of the patient’s:
epithelioid histiocytic granuloma and multinucleated giant cells
(original magnification X 400).

The results of his routine biological examination were
normal. Chest computed tomography (CT)
revealed
micronodular lesions in both lungs and a lesion suggestive
of tuberculosis in the right apex (Figure 2). Sputum, urine
and stool samples were collected every day for 3 consecu-
tive days for mycobacterial smear microscopy and culture.
Bronchial washing was performed. All direct microscopic
examinations remained negative. Stool cultures collected
at day 2 and day 3 grew after 29 days of culture on MGIT™
(BD Diagnostic Systems, Le Pont de Claix, France), al-
though sputum and bronchoalveolar
lavage cultures
remained negative at 45 days. PCR performed on colonies
identified Mycobacterium tuberculosis. Antibiotic testing

Figure 2 Thoracic computed tomographic scan showing a
lesion suggestive of tuberculosis in the right apex and diffuse
micronodular involvement.

Yin et al. Journal of Medical Case Reports  (2015) 9:74 

Page 3 of 3

7.

8.

9.

Ghodbane R, Raoult D, Drancourt M. Dramatic reduction of culture time of
Mycobacterium tuberculosis. Sci Rep. 2014;4:4236.
Drancourt M, Raoult D. Cost-effectiveness of blood agar for isolation of
mycobacteria. PLoS Negl Trop Dis. 2007;1:e83.
El Khéchine A, Drancourt M. Diagnosis of pulmonary tuberculosis in a
microbiological laboratory. Med Mal Infect. 2011;41:509–17.

10. Venturini E, Turkova A, Chiappini E, Galli L, de Martino M, Thorne C. Tuberculosis

and HIV co-infection in children. BMC Infect Dis. 2014;14 Suppl 1:S5.

11. Nicol MP, Spiers K, Workman L, Isaacs W, Munro J, Black F, et al. Xpert MTB/
RIF testing of stool samples for the diagnosis of pulmonary tuberculosis in
children. Clin Infect Dis. 2013;57:e18–21. A published erratum appears in
Clin Infect Dis. 2014;59:145.

12. Oramasionwu GE, Heilig CM, Udomsantisuk N, Kimerling ME, Eng B, Nguyen
HD, et al. The utility of stool cultures for diagnosing tuberculosis in people
living with the human immunodeficiency virus. Int J Tuberc Lung Dis.
2013;17:1023–8.

sample analysis. This underlines the necessity of using a
comprehensive approach to the diagnosis of tuberculosis
facilitated by the use of this kit [9]. Stool sample analysis
is a non-invasive procedure useful for helping to diagnose
tuberculosis [4,5]. Some studies have shown that it can be
a rapid tool, especially in children with HIV infection, with
the use of PCR [10,11]. Finally, a large study suggested
that stool culture was similar to third sputum for diagnos-
ing tuberculosis in patients with HIV infection [12].

Conclusions
This case confirms the usefulness of routine stool cul-
ture in making the diagnosis of tuberculosis, including
atypical presentations.

Consent
Written informed consent was obtained from the patient
for publication of this case report and any accompanying
images. A copy of the written consent is available for re-
view by the Editor-in-Chief of this journal.

Abbreviations
CT: Computed tomography; PCR: Polymerase chain reaction.

Competing interests
The authors declare that they have no competing interests.

Authors’ contributions
NY and MDe wrote the manuscript. AG performed the biopsy and reviewed
the manuscript. JDG performed the histological examination of the vocal
cord and prepared the histological figure. MDr and PB reviewed the
manuscript. JCL managed the case and reviewed and edited the manuscript
drafts. All authors read and approved the final manuscript.

Acknowledgments
We thank Carole Eldin, MD, who provided help in revising the manuscript.

Author details
1Assistance Publique-Hôpitaux de Marseille, CHU Nord, Pôle Infectieux,
Institut Hospitalo-Universitaire Méditerranée Infection, 13015 Marseille,
France. 2Service d’ORL et de chirurgie cervico-faciale, CHRU La Timone, 264,
rue Saint-Pierre, 13385 Marseille, cedex 05, France. 3Service
d’Anatomo-pathologie, Assistance Publique-Hôpitaux de Marseille, Hôpital de
la Timone, Marseille, France. 4Aix Marseille Université, URMITE, UMR63, CNRS
7278, IRD 198, Inserm 1095, Marseille, France.

Received: 18 November 2014 Accepted: 18 February 2015

References
1.

Benwill JL, Sarria JC. Laryngeal tuberculosis in the United States of America:
a forgotten disease. Scand J Infect Dis. 2014;46:241–9.
Rizzo PB, Da Mosto MC, Clari M, Scotton PG, Vaglia A, Marchiori C. Laryngeal
tuberculosis: an often forgotten diagnosis. Int J Infect Dis. 2003;7:129–31.
Smulders YE, De Bondt BJ, Lacko M, Hodge JA, Kross KW. Laryngeal
tuberculosis presenting as a supraglottic carcinoma: a case report and
review of the literature. J Med Case Rep. 2009;3:9288.
El Khéchine A, Henry M, Raoult D, Drancourt M. Detection of Mycobacterium
tuberculosis complex organisms in the stools of patients with pulmonary
tuberculosis. Microbiology. 2009;155:2384–9.
Bonnave PE, Raoult D, Drancourt M. Gastric aspiration is not necessary for
the diagnosis of pulmonary tuberculosis. Eur J Clin Microbiol Infect Dis.
2013;32:569–71.
Lawn SD, Zumla AI. Tuberculosis. Lancet. 2011;378:57–72.

2.

3.

4.

5.

6.

Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central
and take full advantage of: 

• Convenient online submission

• Thorough peer review

• No space constraints or color ﬁgure charges

• Immediate publication on acceptance

• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar

• Research which is freely available for redistribution

Submit your manuscript at 
www.biomedcentral.com/submit

