Eradication of advanced pelvic hydatid bone disease 
after limb salvage surgery – 5-year follow-up: a case 
report 

Muhammad Shahid Khan1* 
* Corresponding author 
Email: khan.shahid1945@gmail.com 

Pervaiz Mehmood Hashmi2 
Email: pervaiz.hashmi@aku.edu 

Dawar Khan3 
Email: dawar.khan@aku.edu 

1 Current address: Department of Orthopaedics, Shah Bhitai District Government 
Hospital, Hyderabad, Pakistan 

2 Section of Orthopaedics, Department of Surgery, Aga Khan University 
Hospital, Karachi, Pakistan 

3 Department of Radiology, Aga Khan University Hospital, Karachi, Pakistan 

Abstract 

Introduction 

Echinococcosis is produced by the larval stage of Echinococcus granulosus; it is a parasitic 
disease  which  is  seen  rarely  in  humans  and  has  adverse  outcomes.  We  report  a  case  of 
advanced pelvic hydatid bone disease with successful limb salvage surgery. Our patient had a 
5-year follow-up without recurrence which is a rarity as per the literature. Early diagnosis and 
prompt medical therapy are necessary for effective management whereas delayed diagnosis is 
always fraught with the risk of recurrence and sepsis. 

Case presentation 

In 2009, a 30-year-old  woman, native of Karachi (Sindhi ethnicity), presented at our clinic 
with  history  of  a  pathological  fracture  11  years  earlier.  Her  fracture  was  initially 
misdiagnosed and fixed. Subsequently she had persistent disease that progressed with time. 
Following  this  she  underwent  multiple  surgeries  and  the  diagnosis  of  hydatid  disease  was 
made but despite multiple debridements and medical therapy she was not cured and finally 
she was offered a hemipelvectomy (limb sacrifice). On presentation to our hospital she was 
counseled  regarding  options  of  hemipelvectomy  versus  a  limb  salvage  form  of  modified 
internal  hemipelvectomy  and  wide  margin  resection.  She  opted  for  limb  salvage.  She 
underwent internal hemipelvectomy with wide margin resection of soft tissue and proximal 
femur along with postoperative albendazole therapy. She was able to walk again after a very 
long  period.  Currently  she  is  5-years  postreconstructive  surgery.  She  is  infection  free  and 
ambulant without support. 

Conclusions 

Hydatid  bone  disease  is  a  rare  entity  in  our  part  of  the  world  but  a  careful  history  and 
thorough  look  at  the  initial  images  of  our  patient  would  have  led  to  the  suspicion  of 
pathologic  fracture  and  subsequent  early  diagnosis  of  this  difficult  problem.  A  second 
important  learning  point  in  this  case  was  the  lack  of  early  referral  to  a  center  where  this 
difficult  problem  could  have  been  handled  effectively.  This  could  have  minimized  the 
physical, mental and financial stress to the patient and her family. 

Keywords 

Hydatid bone disease, Limb salvage surgery 

Introduction 

Hydatid cyst disease is a parasitic disease caused by a cestode known as echinococcus. The 
genus  Echinococcus  includes  three  species  of  which  Echinococcus  granulosus  is  the  most 
common cause of hydatid disease in humans [1-3]. The tapeworm resides in the small bowel 
of the hosts and infected ova are shed in the feces. When ingested by intermediate hosts such 
as humans, sheep, or cattle, the larvae enter the portal circulation. The larvae eventually reach 
the liver; where most of them are trapped. Sometimes, larvae reach the lungs and other areas 
of the body and form cysts. The strong structure of osseous tissue limits the growth of the 
hydatid cyst, which spreads along medullar and trabecular channels [4]. The disease affects 
the  long  bones,  vertebral  column,  pelvis,  and  costae  in  order  from  least  to  most  affected 
region  [1,5].  Hydatid  bone  disease  is  rare,  approximately  0.5  to  2.5%  of  all  human 
hydatidosis [6]. Although long-term survival is possible, the disease is not easy to eradicate 
and may be impossible to cure [7-9]. Hydatid bone disease is essentially  the disease of the 
young.  Early  diagnosis  is  primarily  based  on  X-ray  findings  which  are  not  specific  to  the 
disease. Patients usually present at an advanced stage of the disease and, therefore, treatment 
is  difficult  and  recurrence  is  common.  It  is  a  serious  disease  which  is  difficult  to  eradicate 
because  of  complex  and  difficult  resection.  We  present  a  patient  who  was  initially 
misdiagnosed and underwent multiple surgeries. She is in our follow-up (more than 5 years 
now) and until now she is infection and disease free. 

Case presentation 

In 2009, a 30-year-old  woman, native of Karachi (Sindhi ethnicity), presented at our clinic 
with a 3-year history of discharging sinus of her right hip and inability to ambulate. She had a 
history of right proximal femur fracture secondary to a trivial trauma 11 years earlier (Figure 
1).  She  initially  remained  under  treatment  of  bone  setters  for  3  months  and  then  she 
underwent fixation (in 1998) with dynamic hip screw (Figure 2) in a tertiary hospital without 
a biopsy being done although history and X-rays were suggestive of pathologic fracture. She 
remained  symptomatic  postoperatively  and  gradually  the  implant  cut  through  the  femoral 
head  (Figures  3  and  4).  In  2007  the  implant  was  removed  (Figure  5)  in  another  tertiary 
hospital  and 
tissue  was  sent  for  histopathology  which  showed  hydatid  disease. 
Postoperatively  she  developed  discharging  sinus  for  which  she  underwent  multiple 
debridements along with prolonged courses of albendazole but her condition did not improve. 

Figure 1 Initial X-ray of the patient before surgical intervention in 1998. There is 
proximal femur fracture along with radiolucencies present in proximal femur including the 
femoral head. 

Figure 2 Initial fixation with dynamic hip screw done in 1998. 

Figure 3 Further progression of radiolucencies in proximal femur along with lag screw 
cutting through the femoral head. Year 2000. 

Figure 4 Further progression of disease involving acetabulum as well. Year 2007. 

Figure 5 Implant removal done in year 2007. 

In  2009,  she  was  offered  a  hemipelvectomy  after  which  she  visited  our  hospital.  On 
examination she was unable to bear weight on her right leg. Her right leg was shortened by 
4cm;  the  girth  of  her  right  thigh  was  increased  by  8cm.  There  were  multiple  discharging 
sinuses over her right thigh and right hip with seropurulent discharge. There were multiple 
scars over the lateral aspect of her right proximal thigh with limited, painful range of motion 
of her right hip. Distal neurovascular status was intact. X-rays were performed that showed 
grossly  extensive  involvement  of  her  proximal  femur  and  acetabulum  (Figure  6A,  6B  and 
6C). Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of her pelvis was done which showed erosions and 
altered signals in right proximal femur, acetabuli, ischium pubic rami and right ilium (Figures 
7, 8 and 9). There was atrophy of her hip muscles, scarring and lymphatics obstruction. Her 
uterus,  ovaries  and  opposite  hip  were  unremarkable.  An  ultrasound  of  her  abdomen  was 
unremarkable. Options of hemipelvectomy versus a limb salvage form of modified internal 
hemipelvectomy and wide margin resection were explained to her. The second option had a 
risk of recurrence and infection but she opted for the same. 

Figure 6 X-ray pelvis (Figure 6A) and femur (Figure 6B and 6C) on presentation at our 
institute in 2009. There is bone loss in proximal femur with extensive involvement of 
proximal femur shaft and presence of radiolucencies in acetabulum as well. 

Figure 7 Coronal and axial magnetic resonance images of pelvis show heterogeneous 
signals on short-tau inversion recovery, predominantly high signals on T2-weighted 
image (fat saturation) and low signals on T1-weighted image. 

Figure 8 Postgadolinium images showing significant heterogeneous enhancement. 

Figure 9 No diffusion restriction on diffusion-weighted imaging and signal drop out on 
apparent diffusion coefficient mapping. 

In  March  2009,  an  internal  hemipelvectomy  with  wide  margin  resection  of  soft  tissue  and 
proximal femur was done (Figure 10A  and 10B). Perioperatively frozen sections were sent 
from  resected  margins  that  were  reported  as  disease  free  (no  cyst  wall,  no  scolices). 
Postoperatively she remained on skeletal traction and received albendazole therapy for more 
than  3  months.  As  her  wound  and  infection  parameters  gradually  improved  she  underwent 
reconstruction  with  free  vascularized  fibular  graft  along  with  liquid  crystalline  polymer 
(LCP)  in  August  2009  (Figures  11A  and  11B).  Postoperatively  a  hip  spica  was  applied. 
Follow-up imaging  was  done to assess union (Figure 12A and 12B; Figures 13A, 13B and 

13C).  Gradually  her  ambulation  progressed  and  she  was  able  to  ambulate  without  support 
after a long time. 

Figure 10 X-ray pelvis (Figure 10A) and lower limb scanogram (Figure 10B) showing 
internal hemipelvectomy with resection of proximal femur. March 2009. 

Figure 11 X-ray pelvis (Figure 11A) and femur (Figure 11B) showing reconstruction 
with free vascularized fibular graft along with LCP (Locking Compression Plate). 
August 2009. 

Figure 12 4 month follow-up showing scanogram of lower limbs (Figure 12A) and X-ray 
pelvis (Figure 12B). 

Figure 13 One year follow-up x-rays of pelvis (Figure 13A) and femur (Figure 13B and 
13C). 

She remained ambulant ‘as tolerated’ until February 2013 when she had a fall at home and 
sustained right patella fracture for which tension band wiring was done (Figures 14A to 14E). 
Her postoperative recovery remains smooth and now, in August 2014, 60 months (5 years) 
postoperative  from  her  reconstructive  surgery  she  is  ambulant  without  any  support.  At 
present she is infection and disease free. 

Figure 14 Follow-up X rays of femur (Figure 14A and Figure 14B), knee (Figure 14C 
and Figure 14D) and lateral view of hip (Figure 14E), at 42 months following surgery, 
showing good consolidation of union and hypertrophy of the fibula. Also note fixation of 
patella (Figure 14C and Figure 14D). 

Discussion 

Hydatid pelvic disease of the bone is considered to be the disease of the young. Diagnosis is 
primarily  based  on  the  findings  of  X-rays  and  computed  tomography  (CT)  scans  [9-11]. 
Hydatid bone disease should be considered in any differential diagnosis of osteolytic lesions, 
especially in endemic regions. The location is mostly hepatic (75%) and pulmonary (15%), 
and  only  10%  occur  in  the  rest  of  the  body.  Primary  skeletal  involvement  seldom  occurs. 
Bone  involvement  is  seen  in  only  1  to  2.5%  of  cases  of  hydatidosis  [12]  and  surprisingly 
musculoskeletal  lesions  of  cystic  echinococcosis  usually  occur  as  isolated  findings  and 
without  concomitant  hepatic  or  pulmonary 
the 
involvement of other organs should be ruled out in any patient with bone hydatidosis. The 
spine is the most common location for about 50% of osseous hydatidosis, followed by pelvis 
and hip, the femur, the tibia, the ribs and the scapula [14]. Hydatid disease of bone usually 
remains  asymptomatic  over  a  long  period,  and  it  is  usually  detected  after  a  pathological 
fracture  or  secondary  infection  or  the  onset  of  compressive  symptoms  on  adjacent  soft 
tissues. The clinical manifestation may take 10 to 20 years to become obvious, since the cyst 
grows very slowly. The most common radiological manifestation of skeletal hydatid disease 
is of a lucent expansile lesion with cortical thinning [15]. The CT appearance of a bone lesion 
is a well-defined, typically multiloculated osteolytic lesion sometimes with coarse trabeculae 
within it, giving a honeycomb appearance, which is accompanied by expansion of the bone 
and thinning of its cortex [16]. The MRI signal intensity pattern of the daughter cysts reflects 
their contents and may vary in cysts that are dead or alive. The production of hydatid fluid 

involvement  [12,13].  Nevertheless, 

stops when they disintegrate at death [17]. MRI is also helpful in delineating the soft tissue 
extent of the disease. Immunodiagnosis is useful not only in primary diagnosis but also for 
follow-up  of  patients  after  surgical  or  pharmacological  treatment  [18].  Detection  of 
circulating  Echinococcus  granulosus  antigens  in  serum  is  less  sensitive  than  antibody 
detection,  which  remains  the  method  of  choice  [14].  Enzyme-linked  immunosorbent  assay, 
indirect  hemagglutination  antibody  assay,  latex  agglutination  test,  and  immunoblot  test  are 
the most commonly used immunological methods. Theoretically, surgery with a broad safety 
margin  is  the  best  treatment  for  bone  hydatidosis  [19];  however,  most  times  this 
recommendation  is  impossible.  For  example,  in  most  common  sites  of  hydatid  disease  of 
bone,  spine  and  pelvis,  radical  resection  of  the  lesion  is  practically  impossible  [19]. 
Comparable data have been collected on the outcome of chemotherapy  with benzimidazole 
carbamate (albendazole) that show encouraging results [14]. Albendazole sulfoxide is better 
absorbed  with  higher  levels  of  active  metabolite  in  the  cysts  compared  with  other 
benzimidazoles [14]. Treatment with albendazole is effective, but at least one cycle should be 
given  before  operation  and  six  or  more  courses  afterwards  [14].  In  our  study,  our  patient 
underwent multiple surgeries before presenting to our institute, which reflects the importance 
of  diagnosing  the  disease  early  because  delay  in  diagnosis  and  inadequate  management,  as 
happened in this case, leads to further advancement of disease and psychological stress to the 
patient and his or her family. The natural course of the hydatid disease was explained to our 
patient including the chances of recurrence of infection. She underwent wide margin excision 
and stabilization of proximal femur defect with free vascularized fibula along with LCP. She 
had a follow-up of 60 months and is infection and disease free until now. 

Conclusions 

Hydatid  bone  disease  is  a  rare  entity  in  our  part  of  the  world  but  a  careful  history  and 
thorough  look  at  the  initial  images  of  our  patient  would  have  led  to  the  suspicion  of 
pathologic  fracture  and  subsequently  early  diagnosis  of  this  difficult  problem.  A  second 
important  learning  point  in  this  case  was  the  lack  of  early  referral  to  a  center  where  this 
difficult  problem  could  have  been  handled  effectively.  This  could  have  minimized  the 
physical, mental and financial stress to the patient and her family. 

Consent 

Written  informed  consent  was  obtained  from  the  patient  for  publication  of  this  case  report 
and any accompanying images. A copy of the written consent is available for review by the 
Editor-in-Chief of this journal. 

Competing interests 

The authors declare that they have no competing interests. 

Authors’ contributions 

PMH is the surgeon who operated and followed the case. MSK drafted the manuscript along 
with literature review under the supervision of PMH. DK is the radiologist who helped us to 
draft the radiological reports of the patient’s images. All authors read and approved the final 
manuscript. 

Authors’ information 

Muhammad Shahid Khan: former resident, Department of Surgery, Section of Orthopaedics, 
Aga Khan University Hospital, Karachi, Pakistan. 

References 

1. Agarwal S, Shah A, Kadhi SK, Rooney RJ. Hydatid bone disease of the pelvis. A report of 
two cases and review of the literature. Clin Orthop Relat Res. 1992;280:251–5. 

2. Szypryt EP, Morris DL, Mulholland RC. Combined chemotherapy and surgery for hydatid 
bone disease. J Bone Joint Surg (Br). 1987;69(1):141–4. 

3.  Uzel  M,  Hiz  M,  Aydingoz  O.  Curettage,  local  heat  and  cement  application  in 
echinococcosis of bone. Joint Meeting of EMSOS-AMSTS: Florence, Italy; 1995. 

4. El Ibrahimi A, Ankouz A, Daoudi A, Elmrini A. Pelvic bone and hip joint hydatid disease 
revealing a retroperitoneal location. Orthop Rev (Pavia). 2009;1(1):e8. 

5. Porat S, Joseph KN. Hydatid disease of bone: a case report and review of the literature. Isr 
J Med Sci. 1978;14(2):223–7. 

6. Sapkas GS, Stathakopoulos DP, Babis GC, Tsarouchas JK. Hydatid disease of bones and 
joints: 8 cases followed for 4-16 years. Acta Orthop. 1998;69(1):89–94. 

7. Mnaymneh W,  Yacoubian V,  Bikhazi K. Hydatidosis of the pelvic  girdle: Treatment by 
partial pelvectomy. J Bone Joint Surg Am. 1977;59:538–40. 

8.  Natarajan  MV,  Kumar  AK,  Sivaseelam  A,  Iyakutty  P,  Raja  M,  Rajagopal  TS.  Using  a 
custom megaprosthesis to treat hydatidosis of bone: a report of 3 cases. J Orthop Surg-Hong 
Kong. 2002;10(2):203–5. 

9.  Zlitni  M,  Ezzaouia  K,  Lebib  H,  Karray  M,  Kooli  M,  Mestiri  M.  Hydatid  cyst  of  bone: 
diagnosis and treatment. World J Surg. 2001;25(1):75–82. 

10. Markakis P, Markaki S, Prevedorou D, Bouropoulou V. Echinococcosis of bone: clinico-
laboratory  findings  and  differential  diagnostic  problems.  Archives  d'anatomieet  de 
cytologiepathologiques. 1990;38(3):92. 

11. Saidi F. Hydatid cysts of bone. Surg hydatid Dis. 1976;1:135–8. 

12. Merkle EM, Schulte M, Vogel J, Tomczak R, Rieber A, Kern P, et al. Musculoskeletal 
involvement in cystic echinococcosis: report of eight cases and review of the literature. AJR 
Am J Roentgenol. 1997;168(6):1531–4. 

13. Garcia-Alvarez F, Torcal J, Salinas JC, Navarro A, Garcia-Alvarez I, Navarro-Zorraquino 
M,  et  al.  Musculoskeletal  hydatid  disease:  a  report  of  13  cases.  Acta  Orthop  Scand. 
2002;73(2):227–31. 

14. Farzan M, Mortazavi SMJ, Motamedi M. Hydatid disease of bone. Acta Medica Iranica. 
2006;44(6):361–4. 

15. Arazi M, Erikoglu M, Odev K, Memik R, Ozdemir M. Primary echinococcus infestation 
of the bone and muscles. Clin Orthop Relat Res. 2005;432:234–41. 

16. Morris BS, Madiwale CV, Garg A, Chavhan GB. Hydatid disease of bone: a mimic of 
other skeletal pathologies. Australas Radiol. 2002;46(4):431–4. 

17. Beggs I. The radiology of hydatid disease. AJR Am J Roentgenol. 1985;145(3):639–48. 

18. Eckert J, Deplazes P. Biological, epidemiological, and clinical aspects of echinococcosis, 
a zoonosis of increasing concern. Clin Microbiol Rev. 2004;17(1):107–35. 

19. Herrera A, Martinez AA. Extraspinal bone hydatidosis. J Bone Joint Surg Am. 2003;85-
A(9):1790–4. 

Figure 1

Figure 2

Figure 3

Figure 4

Figure 5

Figure 6

Figure 7

Figure 8

Figure 9

Figure 10

Figure 11

Figure 12

Figure 13

Figure 14

