De Simone et al. Journal of Medical Case Reports  (2015) 9:85 
DOI 10.1186/s13256-015-0570-3

JOURNAL OF MEDICAL
CASE REPORTS

CA SE R EP O R T
Open Access
Efficacy of aerobic physical retraining in a case of
combined pulmonary fibrosis and emphysema
syndrome: a case report
Giuseppe De Simone2, Giovanna Aquino1, Claudio Di Gioia2, Gennaro Mazzarella3, Andrea Bianco1*
and Giuseppe Calcagno1

Abstract

Introduction: Combined pulmonary fibrosis and emphysema has recently been recognized as a syndrome but
remains under-diagnosed. Neither clinical management nor therapeutic approaches have been clearly defined.
Pulmonary rehabilitation has not been considered within the therapeutic options for combined pulmonary fibrosis
and emphysema. In this case we explored the potential benefits of a specific aerobic physical retraining program
in the management of combined pulmonary fibrosis and emphysema.
Case presentation: We describe the case of a 65-year-old Caucasian man with combined pulmonary fibrosis and
emphysema and respiratory failure who was receiving long-term oxygen therapy. Our patient underwent physical
retraining with moderate intensity aerobic and breathing exercises for four weeks. Clinical and motor tests, as well as
questionnaires assessing quality of life and depression levels, were performed prior to and following the retraining. At
the end of the retraining program a relevant reduction of long-term oxygen therapy requirement was registered;
improvements in terms of physical performance, quality of life, and mood were observed in our patient but no
change in respiratory parameters.
Conclusions: A program of aerobic physical retraining appears to be beneficial to patients with combined
pulmonary fibrosis and emphysema and may be considered as an additional therapeutic option.
Keywords: Aerobic physical retraining, Combined pulmonary fibrosis and emphysema, CPFE, Pulmonary
rehabilitation

Introduction
High-resolution computed tomography (HRCT) scan-
ning has enhanced recognition of the simultaneous oc-
currence of emphysema and pulmonary fibrosis and,
recently, combined pulmonary fibrosis and emphysema
(CPFE) has been defined as a syndrome. This syndrome
is characterized by upper lobe emphysema and lower
lobe fibrosis [1]. Common risk factors resulting in epi-
thelial
lung alterations may contribute to emphysema
and pulmonary fibrosis despite clinical, radiological, and
pathologic differences [2-4]. Coexistence of emphysema
and fibrosis are more likely to occur in smoking-induced

* Correspondence: andrea.bianco@unimol.it
1Department of Medicine and Health Sciences, “V Tiberio” University of
Molise, Campobasso, Italy
Full list of author information is available at the end of the article

parenchymal pulmonary damage [5,6]. CPFE is still
under-diagnosed and clinical management as well as
therapeutic approaches have not yet been clearly defined.
In this case we explore the potential benefits of a spe-
cific aerobic physical retraining program, which has not
yet been considered within the therapeutic options for
CPFE.

Case presentation
We report the case of a 65-year-old Caucasian man who
had previously smoked cigarettes (40 pack-years) who
had CPFE with several comorbidities, including hyper-
tension,
type II diabetes, and depression. Before his
CPFE diagnosis our patient had been affected by chronic
bronchitis for 12 years. His diagnosis of CPFE was con-
firmed by thoracic HRCT showing areas of intralobular

© 2015 De Simone et al.; licensee BioMed Central. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and
reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly credited. The Creative Commons Public Domain
Dedication waiver (http://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/) applies to the data made available in this article,
unless otherwise stated.

De Simone et al. Journal of Medical Case Reports  (2015) 9:85 

Page 2 of 4

interstitial and septal thickening with peripheral bilateral
distribution in addition to centrilobular emphysema of
both his upper lobes. On admission to our rehabilitation
clinic, our patient exhibited chronic respiratory failure,
reporting dyspnea on exertion and productive cough;
our patient was receiving long-term oxygen therapy
(LTOT) with 2.5L/min of flow during 24 hours as his
peripheral capillary oxygen saturation (SpO2) steeply de-
clined when oxygen therapy was discontinued (SpO2=
84%). Spirometry showed a relatively mild restriction al-
though his diffusion lung capacity for carbon monoxide
(DLCO) was 44% of predicted. Concurrent pulmonary
hypertension (PAP 60mmHg) was diagnosed by color
doppler echocardiography.

Our patient’s pharmacological

therapy consisted of
high dose inhaled steroids, acetyl-cysteine 1200mg once
daily, angiotensin-converting-enzyme inhibitor (Lisino-
pril) 10mg once daily, and aspirin 100mg once daily.
Respiratory and physical exercise test assessments were
carried out at admission and discharge; in addition, qual-
ity of life (St. George Respiratory) and depression level
(Geriatric Depression Scale) questionnaires were admin-
istered by a clinical psychologist. Our patient performed
the six-minute walk test (6MWT) to evaluate his aerobic
physical performance according to the European Re-
spiratory Society/American Thoracic Society recommen-
dation, 2014. The test was performed by an exercise
physiologist indoors, along a long, flat, straight, enclosed
corridor with a hard surface of 30 meters, and results
reported as distance (meters) covered in six minutes. His
usual medical regimen was continued and oxygen ther-
apy during the test was administered via a portable oxy-
gen tank. As required by standard protocol, our patient
decided the speed of the walk, stopping as required and
resuming the test when recovered. Before, during, and
after the test, his heart rate and oxygen saturation were
reordered using a professional oximeter, and dyspnea
levels and overall fatigue were assessed according to the
Borg Scale and Visual Analogue Scale (VAS) before and
immediately after exercise test. After two weeks in our
rehabilitation unit, our patient was clinically stabilized
and enrolled in the retraining program for four weeks.
The retraining program took place in the cardiorespira-
tory gymnasium of our rehabilitation unit. Written con-
sent was obtained from our patient before starting the
exercise program.

Each retraining session was supervised by an exercise
physiologist monitoring heart and respiratory rate, oxy-
gen saturation, blood pressure, and level of dyspnea.
Our patient underwent the exercise program for two
sessions per day up to 30 minutes each, five days per
week, for a four-week period. The training included one
session of aerobic exercise and one session of breathing
technique. For aerobic training, he exercised on a

treadmill, with a speed of 2.5km per hour and 0% of
slope. The intensity of aerobic exercise was adapted to
our patient’s functional capacity on the basis of his
6MWT results,
in accordance with aerobic exercise
intensity recommended by American Thoracic Society
Guidelines 2006 for pulmonary rehabilitation. Therefore,
the work rate of training corresponded to 50% to 60% of
his maximum heart rate and the training began at a
work rate equal to 50%. When our patient reached the
level of exercise at 10 minutes without intolerable dys-
pnea (Borg rating of breathlessness of <5), the workload
(speed and/or elevation) and duration of exercise were
increased by 10% [7]. Progressive exercise training was
employed for his respiratory muscles; the training con-
sisted of diaphragmatic breathing and inspiratory muscle
training, through an inspiratory threshold, at 40% to
50% of his initial maximal inspiratory pressure (PiMax).
During training our patient received oxygen therapy to
maintain SpO2 >92%; a flow reduction of 15% was made
each week.

After the four-week retraining program, because his
arterial blood gas analysis showed a PaO2 increase of
11% and PCO2 decrease of 5.6% on oxygen with a flow
of 2.5L/min, it was possible to reduce his LTOT to a
flow of 1.5L/min for 24 hours to compensate hypoxemia.
The oxygen requirement reduction observed may have
been due to the strengthening of his respiratory muscles,
which allowed improvement of his exercise capacity [8].
His pulmonary artery systolic pressure, estimated by
transthoracic two-dimensional echocardiography,
im-
proved by 16% in terms of cardiac index and pulmonary
vascular resistance [9]; no significant
lung function
changes were observed. Relevant improvements in exer-
cise capacity, dyspnea rating, health-related quality of
life, and levels of depression were also demonstrated
after the pulmonary rehabilitation program. His 6MWT
showed an increase of distance walked by 133%. His dys-
pnea scores were reduced: the level of dyspnea at rest
(the Modified Medical Research Council Dyspnea Scale)
decreased from 3.0 to 2.0, Borg Scale during exercise
was reduced from 9.0 to 5.0, and his post-exercise VAS
decreased from 8.0 to 5.0; there was only a minor in-
crease in PiMax of 17%. Our patient’s adherence to the
retraining program was good and no adverse events oc-
curred. Table 1 reports the test results collected before
and after the retraining program.

Discussion
In this case study we evaluated whether a patient with
CPFE, a disease which has not yet been considered for
pulmonary rehabilitation, can benefit from an aerobic
retraining program. Emphysema and pulmonary fibrosis
are progressive lung diseases that may be associated with
comorbidities and systemic consequences [10-14]. CPFE

De Simone et al. Journal of Medical Case Reports  (2015) 9:85 

Page 3 of 4

Table 1 Results of cardiorespiratory and clinical tests before and after a retraining program in a patient with
combined pulmonary fibrosis and emphysema
Test
Respiratory functional tests

Assessment before retraining program
FEV1/FVC

78%

Assessment after retraining program
FEV1/FVC

77%

(cid:129) Spirometry

(cid:129) Diffusion lung capacity for
carbon monoxide

Arterial blood gas analysis

on oxygen 2.5L/min

Dyspnea scales

(cid:129) Modified Medical Research Council
(cid:129) Visual Analogue Scale
(cid:129) Borg Scale

Transthoracic two-dimensional
echocardiography

Physical exercise test

(cid:129) Respiratory muscle strength

Six-minute walk test

Geriatric Depression Scale

Quality of life

St. George Questionnaire

Long-term oxygen therapy

FEV1

FVC

DLCO

PaO2
PaCO2
pH

PAP

Right ventricular
hypertrophy

PiMax

PeMax

Symptoms

Physical activities

Impact

Total score

Flow 2.5L/min for
24 hours

79% of predicted value FEV1

73% of predicted value FVC

44% of predicted value DLCO

63.4mmHg

35.6mmHg

7.46

PaO2
PaCO2
pH

3.0

8.0

9.0

82% of predicted value

75% of predicted value

47% of predicted value

70.4mmHg

33.6mmHg

7.369

2.0

5.0

5.0

60mmHg

PAP

50mmHg

40mmHg

25mmHg
90ma
25/30 severe
depression

77.51

85.66

70.39

83.86

Right ventricular
hypertrophy

PiMax

PeMax

Symptoms

Physical activities

Impact

Total score

Flow 1.5L/min for
24 hours

53mmHg

60mmHg

210m

16/30 mild
depression

50.18

62.55

50.64

71.54

aThe six-minute walk test, before the retraining program, was stopped due to patient breathlessness. DLCO, diffusion lung capacity for carbon monoxide; FEV 1,
Forced expiratory volume in one second; FVC, forced vital capacity; PaO2, partial arterial pressure of oxygen; PaCO2, partial pressure of carbon dioxide; PAP, pulmonary
artery pressure; PiMax, maximal inspiratory pressure; PeMax, maximal expiratory pressure.

syndrome typically occurs in male smokers and is fre-
quently complicated by pulmonary hypertension, acute
lung injury, and lung cancer, which affect disease progres-
sion and survival. In the literature there are no reports on
the efficacy of physical retraining in patients with CPFE,
in contrast with other lung diseases such as chronic ob-
structive pulmonary disease or idiopathic pulmonary fi-
brosis where clinical studies have demonstrated the
benefits of pulmonary rehabilitation [15]. Clinically rele-
vant improvements and short-term benefits were clearly
demonstrated in this report as a result of a retraining
program. Although clinical studies on long-term effects
within a large patient population are required for defini-
tive conclusions, our observations suggest that integrating
pulmonary rehabilitation with pharmacological treatments
would be beneficial for patients with CPFE.

Conclusions
In the literature there are no reports on the effects of
pulmonary rehabilitation in patients with CPFE. The
potential efficacy of aerobic exercise on quality of life and
psychological well-being and exercise capacity function in
a patient with CPFE has been demonstrated in this case.
Our results suggest that exercise should also be consid-
ered as a therapeutic option for patients with CPFE, al-
though further studies considering the impact of different
types of training in this patient population are required.

Consent
Written informed consent was obtained from the patient
for publication of this case report. A copy of the written
consent is available for review by the Editor-in-Chief of
this journal.

De Simone et al. Journal of Medical Case Reports  (2015) 9:85 

Page 4 of 4

Abbreviations
DLCO: diffusion lung capacity for carbon monoxide; FEV 1: Forced Expiratory
Volume in one second; FVC: Forced Vital Capacity; HRCT: high-resolution
computed tomography; LTOT: long-term oxygen therapy; PaO2: partial
arterial pressure of oxygen; PaCO2: partial pressure of carbon dioxide;
PAP: pulmonary artery pressure; PiMax: maximal inspiratory pressure;
PeMax: maximal expiratory pressure; 6MWT: six-minute walk test, VAS, Visual
Analogue Scale.

Competing interests
The authors declare that they have no competing interests.

Authors’ contributions
GDS, GM, AB, and GC analyzed and interpreted the patient data and wrote
the article. GDS, GA, and CDG planned and carried out the pulmonary
rehabilitation program. All authors read and approved the final manuscript.

Author details
1Department of Medicine and Health Sciences, “V Tiberio” University of
Molise, Campobasso, Italy. 2Institute of Rehabilitation “Villa Margherita
Benevento”, Unit of Cardiology and Pneumology, Benevento, Italy.
3Department of Cardio-Thoracic and Respiratory Sciences, Second University
of Napoli, Napoli, Italy.

Received: 1 September 2014 Accepted: 9 March 2015

References
1.

Cottin V, Nunes H, Brillet P. Combined pulmonary fibrosis and emphysema:
a distinct underrecognised entity. Eur Respir J. 2005;26:586–93.
Chilosi M, Poletti V, Rossi A. The pathogenesis of COPD and IPF: distinct
horns of the same devil? Respir Res. 2012;13:3.

2.

3. Mazzarella G, Esposito V, Bianco A. Inflammatory effects on human lung

4.

5.

6.

epithelial cells after exposure to diesel exhaust micron sub particles (PM1.0)
and pollen allergens. Environ Pollut. 2012;161:64–9.
Esposito V, Lucariello A, Savarese L. Morphology changes in human lung
epithelial cells after exposure to diesel exhaust micron sub particles (PM1.0)
and pollen allergens. Environ Pollut. 2012;171:162–7.
Katzenstein AL, Mukhopadhyay S, Zanardi C. Clinically occult interstitial
fibrosis in smokers: classification significance of a surprisingly common
finding in lobectomy specimens. Hum Pathol. 2010;41(3):316–25.
De Laurentiis G, Paris D, Melck D. Separating smoking-related diseases using
NMR-based metabolomics of exhaled breath condensate. J Proteome Res.
2013;12:1502–11.

7. Maldor MJ, Kufel TJ, Pineda LA. Effect of pulmonary rehabilitation on

quadriceps fatigability during exercise. Am J Respir Crit Care Med.
2001;163:930–5.
Decramer M. Response of the respiratory muscles to rehabilitation in COPD.
J Appl Physiol. 2009;107:971–6.

8.

9. Mereles D, Ehlken N, Kreuscher S. Exercise and respiratory training improve

exercise capacity and quality of life in patients with severe chronic
pulmonary hypertension. Circulation. 2006;114:1482–9.

10. Daniele A, De Rosa A, Nigro E. Adiponectin oligomerization state and

adiponectin receptors airway expression in chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease. Int J Biochem Cell Biol. 2012;44:563–9.

11. Nigro E, Scudiero O, Sarnataro D. Adiponectin affects lung epithelial A549
cell viability counteracting TNFa and IL-1ß toxicity through AdipoR1. Int J
Biochem Cell Biol. 2013;45(6):1145–53.

12. Corbi G, Bianco A, Turchiarelli V. Potential mechanisms linking

atherosclerosis and increased cardiovascular risk in COPD: focus on sirtuins.
Int J Mol Sci. 2013;14(6):12696–713.

13. Bianco A, Mazzarella G, Turchiarelli V. Adiponectin: an attractive marker for

metabolic disorders in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD).
Nutrients. 2013;5:4115–25.

14. Nussbaumer-Ochsner Y, Rabe KF. Systemic manifestations of COPD. Chest.

15.

2011;139:165–73.
Kozu R, Senjyu H, Jenkins SC. Differences in response to pulmonary
rehabilitation in idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis and chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease. Respiration. 2010;81(3):196–205.

Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central
and take full advantage of: 

• Convenient online submission

• Thorough peer review

• No space constraints or color ﬁgure charges

• Immediate publication on acceptance

• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar

• Research which is freely available for redistribution

Submit your manuscript at 
www.biomedcentral.com/submit

