Mohammed et al. Journal of Medical Case Reports  (2015) 9:45 
DOI 10.1186/s13256-015-0517-8

CA SE R EP O R T

JOURNAL OF MEDICAL
CASE REPORTS

Open Access

Castleman’s disease and sarcoidosis, a rare
association resulting in a “mixed” response:
a case report
Anwarullah Mohammed1, Filip Janku2, Ming Qi3 and Razelle Kurzrock4*

Abstract
Introduction: Multicentric Castleman’s disease is a rare lymphoproliferative disorder whose hallmark is atypical
lymph node hyperplasia. Symptoms can include fever, splenomegaly, and abnormal blood cell counts. High levels
of interleukin 6 (IL-6) are observed frequently in this disorder and are believed to drive the disease. Recently,
therapies that target interleukin-6 or its receptor have been shown to be effective in Castleman’s disease.
Case presentation: We report the case of a 76-year-old Caucasian man with aggressive biopsy-proven Castleman’s
disease who experienced pulmonary and lymph node involvement, as well as fever and weight loss. He was treated
with siltuximab, a chimeric anti-interleukin-6 antibody. After 5 months, fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission
tomography computed tomography scans showed marked improvement in his lungs, but worsening mediastinal
disease, consistent with a mixed response. Biopsy of the mediastinal disease revealed lymphoplasmacytic infiltrate with
non-caseating, ill-defined granulomas and scarring consistent with sarcoidosis. Prednisone 50mg by mouth daily was
started, which was tapered to 2.0-5.0mg daily. Siltuximab was continued. A subsequent fluorodeoxyglucose positron
emission tomography computed tomography scan showed near-complete resolution of lung and mediastinal disease,
now ongoing for 3.5+ years without serious adverse events.
Conclusions: Lymphomas have previously been reported to coexist with sarcoidosis, albeit rarely, but there has been
only a single previous case of this type with Castleman’s disease. Of importance, early recognition of the presence of
sarcoidosis in our patient prevented discontinuation of siltuximab therapy due to “progression”. Our experience may
also have broader implications in that it suggests that etiology of “mixed responses” should be confirmed by
performing biopsies on the progressive tumor.
Keywords: Interleukin 6, Mixed response, Multicentric Castleman’s disease, Siltuximab

Introduction
Castleman’s disease is a rare lymphoproliferative dis-
order characterized by atypical lymph node hyperplasia
that can involve any group of lymph nodes [1]. The eti-
ology of the disease remains unclear, but recently it has
been found to be increasingly associated with infection
with human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) and human
herpesvirus 8 (HHV-8), the causative agent for Kaposi’s
sarcoma [2]. Other disease associations include non-
Hodgkin’s lymphoma, epithelial neoplasia, and renal cell
carcinoma. There has been only one reported case of

* Correspondence: rkurzrock@ucsd.edu
4UC San Diego Moores Cancer Center, 3855 Health Sciences Drive, MC
#0658, La Jolla, CA 92093-0658, USA
Full list of author information is available at the end of the article

Castleman’s disease that coexisted with sarcoidosis [3].
Here, we present another case where coincidental sarcoid-
osis was found after the patient demonstrated a radiologic
mixed response to an anti-interleukin-6 (anti-IL-6) mono-
clonal antibody (CNTO 328; siltuximab) that was recently
approved for the treatment of HIV-negative and HHV-8-
negative multicentric Castleman’s disease [4].

Case presentation
A 76-year-old Caucasian man presented to his physician
with a history of dry cough of a few months’ duration as-
sociated with fatigue, loss of appetite, and weight loss of
more than 18kg (40lb). On further workup, multiple lung
lesions were found on fluorodeoxyglucose positron emis-
sion tomography computed tomography (FDG-PET/CT)

© 2015 Mohammed et al.; licensee BioMed Central. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and
reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly credited. The Creative Commons Public Domain
Dedication waiver (http://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/) applies to the data made available in this article,
unless otherwise stated.

Mohammed et al. Journal of Medical Case Reports  (2015) 9:45 

Page 2 of 4

scan (Figure 1A), which on biopsy and pathologic review
were due to Castleman’s disease. He was negative for HIV
and HHV-8. He was referred to the Clinical Center for
Targeted Therapy (Phase I Clinic) at MD Anderson Cancer
Center for further treatment. His medical history included
hypertension, hyperlipidemia, gastroesophageal reflux dis-
ease, diverticulosis, chronic obstructive pulmonary dis-
ease, and benign prostatic hypertrophy, for which he had

recently undergone transurethral resection of his prostate.
His family history was significant for lymphoma and pros-
tate cancer in his brother, breast cancer in his sister, and
small bowel cancer in his mother. He had last smoked cig-
arettes when he was in college and drank socially. He was
living with his wife and had four children, all in good
health. His medications included tamsulosin, simvastatin,
omeprazole, and a multivitamin.

Figure 1 Fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission tomography computed tomography scans. (A) Baseline images show lung and mediastinal
disease. (B) Images after 5 months of treatment with siltuximab show a mixed response with improvement in lungs and worsening in
mediastinum. (C) After 3.5 years of siltuximab combined with low maintenance doses of prednisone (2.5mg orally daily).

Mohammed et al. Journal of Medical Case Reports  (2015) 9:45 

Page 3 of 4

He was started on siltuximab, previously known as
CNTO 328, a chimeric, human–murine anti-IL-6 anti-
body that binds and neutralizes IL-6 with high affinity
(dose = 11mg/kg intravenously every 3 weeks). This treat-
ment was given as part of a trial previously reported, and
all procedures including consent were performed in ac-
cordance with the guidelines of the MD Anderson Cancer
Center Internal Review Board [5]. He tolerated the treat-
ment well and although he complained of intermittent
fatigue, he was able to ride his bicycle up to 16km (10
miles) in a day. FDG-PET/CT scans showed significant
improvement in his lungs, but worsening mediastinal dis-
ease after approximately 5 months, consistent with a
mixed response (Figure 1B). In order to elucidate the rea-
son for mixed response, a needle biopsy was performed
that showed a lymphoplasmacytic infiltrate with non-
caseating, ill-defined granulomas and scarring consistent
with sarcoidosis. Prednisone 50mg by mouth daily was
started, which was tapered to 5mg daily. This was inter-
mittently restarted at least two more times, but he was
maintained on a dose of 2.5 to 5mg daily for most of
his subsequent course. Siltuximab was continued. A
subsequent FDG-PET/CT scan (Figure 1C) showed
near-complete resolution of lung and mediastinal disease,
and he has continued to receive treatment for 3.5 years
without serious adverse events. He has regained the 18kg
(40lb) lost before treatment and is actively bicycling about
48 to 64km (30 to 40 miles) per week.

Discussion
Castleman’s disease is a rare lymphoproliferative disorder
that was first described as localized lymphoid hyperplasia
involving mainly the mediastinal group of lymph nodes
[1]. Two forms of the disease exist: a localized or uni-
centric form involving only a group of lymph nodes and a
multicentric form that involves different groups of lymph
nodes in different areas of the body. The multicentric
form of Castleman’s disease recently has been found to be
at times associated with HIV and HHV-8 infections. On
histological examination, it is usually divided into the hya-
linized vascular type and the plasma cell variant type, the
latter being more common in the multicentric type of the
disease. There also exists a mixed variant [6,7]. Unicentric
Castleman’s disease usually presents in early adulthood
with localized masses in the mediastinum, rarely causing
systemic symptoms. In contrast, the multicentric form
of Castleman’s disease has been found to occur in the
fifth or sixth decade of life, presenting with vague consti-
tutional symptoms such as fever, night sweats, fatigue,
and weight loss. Various laboratory abnormalities have
also been found,
thrombocytosis,
thrombocytopenia, hypoalbuminemia, hypergammaglo-
bulinemia, and increased C-reactive protein and erythro-
cyte sedimentation rate [8,9].

including anemia,

Treatment of

Lymphoproliferation in Castleman’s disease is thought
to be driven by IL-6, a cytokine produced by various
cells including T cells and B cells in response to various
inflammatory disease processes [9-14]. It stimulates the
production and differentiation of cells, including B cells.
Elevated levels of IL-6 have been demonstrated in murine
models of Castleman’s disease-like syndrome [9]. Various
other mediators have also been identified that could be in-
volved in the progression of the disease.
localized forms of

the disease with
complete surgical excision of the affected lymph node
has been found to be curative [12]. Radiation therapy is
effective when surgery is not possible. However, the mul-
ticentric form of the disease requires systemic treatment.
Medications that have been used include corticosteroids,
antibody against CD20 (rituximab), and, more recently,
there has been considerable success with antibodies tar-
geting IL-6. Tocilizumab, an anti-IL-6 receptor antibody,
has been found to be effective and is approved in Japan
for treatment of Castleman’s disease [9]. It has been re-
ported earlier that siltuximab showed a clinical benefit
response in 78% of patients with Castleman’s disease in
an interim analysis of a phase 1 study [5], and this mol-
ecule was subsequently approved following a registration
study [4].

Our patient had the multicentric type of Castleman’s
disease, for which he received siltuximab, an anti-IL-6
antibody. He had an initial remarkable response in his
lung, but his mediastinal disease worsened. On further in-
vestigation, by performing a fine-needle biopsy, the mixed
response was found to be due to sarcoidosis. There has
been only one previously reported case of Castleman’s dis-
ease that was shown to coexist with sarcoidosis, although
lymphomas have also been associated with sarcoidosis
[3,13,14]. Thus, this association is very rare. Of interest,
IL-6 levels in the supernatants of cultured monocytes and
alveolar macrophages have been reported to be signifi-
cantly higher in patients with sarcoidosis than in controls
[15]. Since IL-6 drives Castleman’s disease, these observa-
tions may provide a mechanistic link between the two
disorders.

Conclusions
This case represents only the second report of coexisting
Castleman’s disease and sarcoidosis. Of
importance,
early recognition of the presence of sarcoidosis in our
patient prevented discontinuation of siltuximab therapy
[4,5,16], as progression was due to the sarcoidosis, rather
than Castleman’s disease. Our experience also suggests
that “mixed responses” should be confirmed by perform-
ing biopsies on progressive tumors. Once sarcoidosis
was recognized to be the cause of worsening of symp-
toms and disease on imaging, steroid therapy was
started, and the patient is doing well with near-complete

Mohammed et al. Journal of Medical Case Reports  (2015) 9:45 

Page 4 of 4

7.

8.

9.

Regal MA, Aljehani YM, Bousbait H. Primary mediastinal Castleman’s disease.
Rare Tumors. 2010;2:e11.
Tal Y, Haber G, Cohen MJ, Phillips M, Amir G, Ben-Yehuda D, et al. Autologous
stem cell transplantation in a rare multicentric Castleman disease of the plasma
cell variant. Int J Hematol. 2011;93:677–80.
El-Osta HE, Kurzrock R. Castleman’s disease: from basic mechanisms to
molecular therapeutics. Oncologist. 2011;16:497–511.

10. Beck JT, Hsu SM, Wijdenes J, Bataille R, Klein B, Vesole D, et al. Brief report:

alleviation of systemic manifestations of Castleman’s disease by monoclonal
anti-interleukin-6 antibody. N Engl J Med. 1994;330:602–5.
Toita N, Kawamura N, Hatano N, Takezaki S, Ohkura Y, Yamada M, et al. A
5-year-old boy with unicentric Castleman disease affecting the mesentery:
utility of serum IL-6 level and (18)F-FDG PET for diagnosis. J Pediatr Hematol
Oncol. 2009;31:693–5.

11.

12. Han SL, Chen XX, Zheng XF, Yan JY, Shen X, Zhu GB. The clinicopathological

behaviour and surgical treatment of abdominal Castleman’s disease. Singapore
Med J. 2010;51:813–6.

13. Cohen PR, Kurzrock R. Sarcoidosis and malignancy. Clin Dermatol.

2007;25:326–33.

14. Oliwiecki S, Kotecha B, Kingston T, Rothera MP. Sarcoidosis-lymphoma

syndrome. J R Soc Med. 1992;85:176–7.
Sahashi K, Ina Y, Takada K, Sato T, Yamamoto M, Morishita M. Significance of
interleukin 6 in patients with sarcoidosis. Chest. 1994;106:156–60.
Kurzrock R, Voorhees PM, Casper C, Furman RR, Fayad L, Lonial S, et al. A phase
I, open-label study of siltuximab, an anti-IL-6 monoclonal antibody, in patients
with B-cell non-Hodgkin lymphoma, multiple myeloma, or Castleman Disease.
Clin Cancer Res. 2013;19(36):3659-70.

resolution of the disease after more than 3 years of sil-
tuximab combined with very low-dose steroids.

Consent
Written informed consent was obtained from the patient
for publication of this Case report and any accompany-
ing images. A copy of the written consent is available for
review by the Editor-in-Chief of this journal.

Abbreviations
FDG-PET/CT: Fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission tomography computed
tomography; HHV-8: Human herpesvirus 8; HIV: Human immunodeficiency
virus; IL-6: Interleukin-6.

Competing interests
Ming Qi is an employee of Janssen R&D LLC.
Razelle Kurzrock, MD received research funding from Janssen R&D LLC.

Authors’ contributions
All authors contributed to analysis of the data, writing and editing the
manuscript and approving the final copy.

15.

16.

Authors’ information
Razelle Kurzrock, MD, joined University of California San Diego Moores
Cancer Center in November 2012 as Senior Deputy Center Director for
Clinical Science. She is also the Murray Professor of Medicine, Director of the
Clinical Trials Office, and Chief of the Division of Hematology-Oncology
Division in the UC San Diego School of Medicine. Anwarullah Mohammed,
MD, served as Resident in Family Practice at North Central Texas Medical
Foundation and as a Research Fellow in Atherosclerosis at Texas Heart
Institute. Filip Janku, MD, is Assistant Professor for Investigational Cancer
Therapeutics (Phase I Clinical Trials Program) at UT M. D. Anderson Cancer
Center. Ming Qi, MD, PhD currently holds the position of Director at Janssen
Research and Development LLC.

Acknowledgements
Editorial assistance was provided by Shannon O’Sullivan of MedErgy and
funded by Janssen R&D LLC.

Author details
1Department of Cardiology, Texas Heart Institute at St. Luke’s Episcopal
Hospital, 6720 Bertner Avenue, Houston, TX 77030, USA. 2Department of
Investigational Cancer Therapeutics, The University of Texas MD Anderson
Cancer Center, 1515 Holcombe Boulevard, Unit Number: 0455, Houston, TX
77030, USA. 3Janssen R&D LLC, 1400 McKean Rd, Spring House (Ambler), PA
19002, USA. 4UC San Diego Moores Cancer Center, 3855 Health Sciences
Drive, MC #0658, La Jolla, CA 92093-0658, USA.

Received: 15 August 2014 Accepted: 8 January 2015

References
1.

Castleman B, Towne VW. Case records of the Massachusetts General
Hospital; weekly clinicopathological exercises; founded by Richard C. Cabot.
N Engl J Med. 1954;251:396–400.

2. Waterston A, Bower M. Fifty years of multicentric Castleman’s disease. Acta

3.

4.

5.

6.

Oncol. 2004;43:698–704.
Rice BL, Farver CF, Pohlman B, Burkey BB, Parambil JG. Concomitant
Castleman’s disease and sarcoidosis. Am J Med Sci. 2011;341:257–9.
van Rhee F, Wong RS, Munshi N, Rossi JF, Ke XY, Fossa A, et al. Siltuximab
for multicentric Castleman’s disease: a randomised, double-blind,
placebo-controlled trial. Lancet Oncol. 2014;15:966–74.
Van Rhee F, Fayad L, Voorhees P, Furman R, Lonial S, Borghaei H, et al.
Siltuximab, a novel anti-interleukin-6 monoclonal antibody, for
Castleman’s disease. J Clin Oncol. 2010;28:3701–8.
Bhatti MA, Ferrante JW, Gielchinsky I, Norman JC. Giant lymph node
hyperplasia of the mediastinum (Castleman’s disease). Tex Heart Inst J.
1984;11:378–84.

Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central
and take full advantage of: 

• Convenient online submission

• Thorough peer review

• No space constraints or color ﬁgure charges

• Immediate publication on acceptance

• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar

• Research which is freely available for redistribution

Submit your manuscript at 
www.biomedcentral.com/submit

