Dozier et al. Journal of Medical Case Reports  (2015) 9:46 
DOI 10.1186/s13256-014-0505-4

JOURNAL OF MEDICAL
CASE REPORTS

CA SE R EP O R T
Massive malignant solitary fibrous tumor arising
from the bladder serosa: a case report
Jordan Dozier1, Zena Jameel2, Donald A McCain1, Patrice Hassoun2 and Zubin M Bamboat1*

Open Access

Abstract

Introduction: Solitary fibrous tumors are rare neoplasms of mesenchymal origin. They are often of low malignant
potential and rarely metastasize. While they frequently arise from the pleura, they can occur at any soft tissue site
in the body. We present a case of a large (28 × 21cm) malignant solitary fibrous tumor arising from the bladder
serosa. In addition, the clinicopathologic features, differential diagnosis, cytogenetics and management of this rare
disease are discussed, along with a review of the existing literature on this topic.
Case presentation: An otherwise healthy 41-year-old Caucasian man presented with weight loss and progressive
abdominal bloating. A subsequent computed tomography scan of his chest, abdomen and pelvis revealed a 26.8 ×
21cm intra-abdominal mass occupying most of his abdominal cavity. The inferior vena cava was compressed, and
the mass extended inferiorly to his upper pelvis abutting the superior dome of his bladder. He underwent operative
resection and the resected mass measured 28 × 21 × 18cm and weighed 4.8kg. The cut surface revealed a gray-white
mass with an ill-defined whorled-like pattern, with randomly assorted tan fleshy nodules. A histologic evaluation
revealed variable, alternating hypercellular and hypocellular areas, with areas of necrosis. The tumor cells varied
from spindle to epithelioid within a hyalinized stroma. In the hypercellular areas, the tumor cells showed moderate
atypia with high mitotic activity. The histological features combined with immunophenotyping were suggestive of
a malignant solitary fibrous tumor that grossly appeared to be growing from the bladder serosa, specifically the
intraperitoneal superior dome of the bladder. Our patient is currently eight months post-surgery without evidence
of recurrence.
Conclusions: Extrapleural occurrences of solitary fibrosis tumors are being increasingly observed. Malignant
solitary fibrosis tumors of the urinary bladder, however, are very rare. As there are no pathognomonic features of
malignancy, surgical resection is often both diagnostic and therapeutic, as was the case in our report.
Keywords: Solitary fibrous tumor, Mesenchymal neoplasm, High grade sarcoma

Introduction
In 1942 Stout and Murray first described and defined
the hemangiopericytoma (HPC). They described a vascu-
lar tumor made of contractile spindle cells surrounding
the capillaries [1]. A decade earlier, the first description of
a solitary fibrous tumor (SFT) was made by Klemperer
and Rabin, who observed a mesothelial tumor arising
from the pleura [2]. Since these early observations, two
important conclusions have been elucidated. First, HPC
was shown to be a characteristic histopathologic pattern
rather than being a specific clinicopathologic entity in and

* Correspondence: Bamboatz@cancersurgeryassociates.com
1Department of Surgery, Division of Surgical Oncology, Hackensack
University Medical Center, 20 Prospect Avenue, Hackensack, NJ 07601, USA
Full list of author information is available at the end of the article

of itself. This branching stromal vascular pattern with a
‘staghorn’ configuration is shared by various tumors, in-
cluding the SFT [3]. Secondly, SFTs have been reported in
numerous extrapleural sites, thus supporting the tumor’s
undifferentiated mesenchymal origin (with fibroblastic or
myofibroblastic features) [4].

In fact, extrapleural SFTs are now more commonly
found than intrathoracic SFTs [5]. Specifically, extra-
pleural SFT has been described within the head and
neck region, central nervous system solid organs, the
retroperitoneum, pelvis and the genitourinary tract [6,7].
SFTs are usually benign, and although cases of malignant
extrapleural SFT have been described, they are extremely
rare. As of 2013, there have been 17 described cases of
SFT arising from the urinary bladder, only two of which

© 2015 Dozier et al.; licensee BioMed Central. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and
reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly credited. The Creative Commons Public Domain
Dedication waiver (http://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/) applies to the data made available in this article,
unless otherwise stated.

Dozier et al. Journal of Medical Case Reports  (2015) 9:46 

Page 2 of 5

showed malignant characteristics [7]. We report a case
of the largest documented malignant SFT involving the
urinary bladder.

Case presentation
A 41-year-old otherwise healthy male presented to the
emergency department at Hakensack University Medical
Center, NJ with abdominal pain and abdominal fullness
that had progressively worsened over the course of the
last year. He also reported constipation, urinary fre-
quency, dyspnea on exertion and a 25-pound weight
loss. A subsequent computed tomography (CT) scan of
his chest, abdomen and pelvis revealed a 26.8 × 21cm
intra-abdominal mass occupying most of his abdominal
cavity (Figure 1). The inferior vena cava was compressed,
and the mass extended inferiorly to the upper pelvis,
abutting the superior dome of his bladder. There was no
evidence of metastatic disease in his chest. Given the size
of the mass and his worsening abdominal pain, the deci-
sion was made for him to undergo surgical resection.

The abdomen was entered through a midline incision.
The liver and peritoneal surfaces were uninvolved. The
mass did not appear to be arising from the retroperito-
neum and was noted to be quite mobile, except in the
pelvis where it was tethered to the superior dome of the
bladder. The mass was freed from the lateral pelvic side
walls and a partial cystectomy was performed en bloc to
remove the specimen. Numerous engorged pelvic veins
were encountered around the inferior aspect of the mass
and the bladder dome. These were appropriately tied off
and stapled using a 45mm vascular load stapler (Covidien,

Mansfield, MA, USA). The midline laparotomy was closed
in routine fashion.

On gross inspection, the mass measured 28 × 21 × 18cm
and weighed 4.8kg. The cut surface revealed a gray-white
mass with an ill-defined whorled-like pattern with ran-
domly assorted tan fleshy nodules (Figure 2). A histologic
evaluation revealed a microscopic margin negative resec-
tion (R0) with variable, alternating hypercellular and hypo-
cellular areas, with areas of necrosis. The tumor cells
varied from spindle to epithelioid within a hyalinized
stroma (Figure 3a-b). In the hypercellular areas, the tumor
cells showed moderate atypia with high mitotic activity
(focally over 10 mitoses per 10 high power fields) and Ki67
positivity of 15% (Figure 3c). His immunohistochemistry
analysis showed that the tumor cells were positive for
vimentin, CD34 (Figure 3d), BCL-2 and beta-catenin, and
negative for pan Cytokeratin, p63, Calretinin, SMA, des-
min, S100, CD-31, CD-117, DOG1, EMA, STAT6, GRIA2
and WT-1. His p53 immuno-histochemical stain was
weakly positive, with 30 to 40% positivity. His cytogenetics
analysis revealed no chromosomal rearrangements at loci
12q13 or 18q11.2.

He had an uneventful post-operative course and was
discharged from the hospital on post-operative day five.
He was seen in the clinic at one, three and eight months
following discharge and is recovering well without evi-
dence of recurrence.

Discussion
Extrapleural SFTs are most commonly diagnosed be-
tween the fifth and seventh decades of life. They are typ-
ically slow growing and asymptomatic. Symptomatic

Figure 1 Coronal section computed tomography scan with
intravenous contrast showing a large mass abutting the urinary
bladder with engorged pelvic veins.

Figure 2 Bisected gross specimen revealing fleshy, tan nodules.

Dozier et al. Journal of Medical Case Reports  (2015) 9:46 

Page 3 of 5

Figure 3 Histopathology of resected solitary fibrous tumor. a. Hematoxylin and eosin stain of tumor showing hypercellularity with moderate
atypia. b. Hematoxylin and eosin stain showing spindle cells within hyalinized stroma in the tumor. c. Ki67 proliferation index (>10 mitoses per 10
high power fields, positive cells stained brown). d. Diffuse CD34 positivity within the tumor.

tumors are typically secondary to the locally invasive na-
ture of the tumor and compression and/or impingement of
nearby structures. Common symptoms seen with intra-
abdominal and pelvic SFTs include pain, palpable mass, ab-
dominal distention, urinary retention, hematuria, constipa-
tion and bowel obstruction [4]. Overall there is an equal
distribution among men and women, however certain SFTs
have been shown to have a gender predilection (for ex-
ample, bladder SFT is 3.5 times more common in males)
[7]. A small subset of tumors may cause a paraneoplastic
syndrome, the most common of which is hypoglycemia
secondary to insulin-like growth factor secreted by the
tumor, or so-called Doege-Potter syndrome [4].

Because of the wide variety in clinical presentation, the
work-up and diagnosis of SFT can be challenging. Al-
though non-specific, certain imaging characteristics have
been observed. A sonography can reveal a hypo- or het-
erogeneous echogenic mass with well-defined margins.
A CT scan typically shows a well-enhanced, circum-
scribed heterogeneous mass. Prominent vasculature due

to mass effect and calcification can be observed in larger
lesions, as seen in our case [5]. Regions of hemorrhage
and necrosis can also be observed, specifically in cases
of malignant SFT. A magnetic resonance imaging scan
typically shows variable (low-to-intermediate) signal in-
tensity on T1 and T2 weighted images, dependent on
collagenous and fibrous stroma content, vascularity and
chronicity of the tumor [8]. Attempts at an image-
guided biopsy have been described, but have been largely
unsuccessful due to sampling error. As such, surgical re-
section is often necessary for diagnostic and therapeutic
purposes.

Macroscopic examination of solitary fibrous tumors
typically reveals a well-circumscribed, tan-colored rub-
bery mass with a white whorled appearance on cut sec-
tions. The mass is often tethered by a pedicle and
encapsulated. Most cases of bladder SFT are described
as being intravesicular, growing from the submucosa,
however there have been isolated cases of pelvic SFT
growing from the serosal surface of the bladder, as was

Dozier et al. Journal of Medical Case Reports  (2015) 9:46 

Page 4 of 5

seen with our patient. Microscopically, SFT is classically
described as having a ‘patternless pattern’, with juxta-
posed hypercellular (spindle to ovoid cells) and hypocel-
lular zones
(hyalinized collagen) and a prominent
branching vasculature [4,7]. Mitoses and microscopic
necrosis are rare in SFTs. Because there are numerous
other spindle cell lesions that can display a similar cellu-
lar architecture (such as gastrointestinal stromal tumor,
leiomyoma, leiomyosarcoma, malignant fibrous histiocy-
toma, benign and malignant nerve sheath tumor and so
forth), the immunohistochemical staining plays an im-
portant role in the diagnosis, as seen in our case. The
tumor cells are often positive for CD34, CD99, vimentin
and BCL-2, and negative for CD117 (in gastrointestinal
stromal tumors), smooth muscle actin (SMA) and des-
min (in smooth muscle tumors) and S-100 protein (in
nerve sheath tumors) [6,7]. Recently, genomic studies
have revealed a gene fusion that may have diagnostic
and therapeutic implications for patients with SFT. The
NAB2 gene which indirectly represses transforming
growth factor (TGF) - β, and the STAT6 gene which is a
transcriptional factor that modulates signaling through
interleukin-4 and interleukin-13, have both been de-
scribed as oncogenic. A recent study of 53 patients
undergoing whole exome tumor sequencing revealed
that when fused, these two genes (located on chromo-
some 12) represent a distinct molecular feature in SFT.
This characteristic fusion transcript occurred in 55% of
tumors, creating the opportunity to develop drugs that
specifically target the fusion gene product. Interestingly,
a cytogenetic analysis did not reveal the NAB2-STAT6
fusion in our patient [9]. Moreover, an immunohisto-
chemistry analysis for STAT6 and GRIA2 was also nega-
tive. An analysis of 44 SFTs by Mohajeri et al. revealed
that in addition to the NAB2-STAT6 fusion transcript,
GRIA2 was the top up-regulated protein found by im-
munohistochemistry using tissue microarrays [10].

Malignant criteria for SFTs include large tumor size
(>10cm), hypercellularity, nuclear atypia, tumor necrosis,
more than four mitoses per 10 high power fields and in-
filtrative margins [5]. However, it is important to note
that malignant histologic features are not always an indi-
cator of aggressive tumor behavior, as benign tumors
can act locally aggressive and recur, while alternatively
malignant tumors can proceed with an indolent course
[4,7]. Nonetheless, with respect to benign SFTs, malig-
nant SFTs do account for higher rates of local recur-
rence (63 versus 8%) and metastasize to distant soft
tissue sites and the lungs [11]. With respect to bladder
SFT, most reported cases have pursued a benign course,
even in the presence of malignant histologic features [7].
Because of the variable clinical behavior and unpre-
dictable nature of SFTs, surgery is considered the treat-
ment of choice. Furthermore,
long-term follow-up is

strongly recommended for all cases of SFT, although no
specific surveillance strategy has proved to be superior.
Surgical resectability is the most important prognostic
factor, and the five-year survival rate is high, with some
authors claiming close to 100% with complete surgical
excision (R0 resection) [5]. For unresectable disease,
chemotherapy and radiation therapy have been described
as having variable success. In one retrospective study of
21 patients with late-stage SFT, 16 of the 18 patients
who received first line chemotherapy (with doxorubicin,
gemcitabine or paclitaxel) had no disease progression for
a median of 4.6 months [12]. Prospective randomized
studies are needed to substantiate these results. Going
forward, anti-angiogenic therapy (such as bevacizumab, a
monoclonal antibody against vascular endothelial growth
factor) has shown promising early results in the treatment
of patients with advanced unresectable tumors [12].

Conclusions
We report the case of a 41-year-old man who presented
with the largest documented case of malignant SFT arising
from the urinary bladder. While there are characteristic
findings suggestive of SFT, no gold standard diagnostic
test currently exists. As such, surgical excision is both
therapeutic and diagnostic when combined with subse-
quent histological,
immunohistochemical and genomic
testing.

Consent
Written informed consent was obtained from the patient
for publication of this Case report and any accompany-
ing images. A copy of the written consent is available for
review by the Editor-in-Chief of this journal.

Abbreviations
CT: Computed tomography; IHC: Immunohistochemistry; SFT: Solitary fibrous
tumor. SMA-Smooth Muscle Antibody; EMA: Anti-endomysial Antibodies;
GRIA2: Glutamate Receptor 2; WT-1: Wilms Tumor Protein; DOG1: Discovered
on GIST1; BCL2: B-Cell Lympoma 2.

Competing interests
The authors declare that they have no competing interests.

Authors’ contributions
JD, ZJ, PH and ZMB contributed to manuscript conception and design,
acquisition of data, analysis and interpretation of data. DAM contributed to
manuscript conception, design and critical revision. All authors have given
final approval of the version to be published and agree to be accountable
for all aspects of the work.

Author details
1Department of Surgery, Division of Surgical Oncology, Hackensack
University Medical Center, 20 Prospect Avenue, Hackensack, NJ 07601, USA.
2Department of Pathology, Hackensack University Medical Center, 30
Prospect Avenue, Hackensack, NJ 07601A, USA.

Received: 14 July 2014 Accepted: 26 December 2014

Dozier et al. Journal of Medical Case Reports  (2015) 9:46 

Page 5 of 5

References
1.

Stout P, Murray MR. Hemangiopericytoma: a vascular tumor featuring
Zimmermann’s pericytes. Ann Surg. 1942;116:26–33.
Klemperer P, Rabin CB. Primary neoplasm of the pleura: a report of five
cases. Arch Pathol. 1931;11:385–412.

2.

3. Mozafarpour S, Khorramirouz R, Tajali A, Salavati A, Kajbafzadeg AM.

4.

5.

6.

7.

8.

9.

Surgically treated bladder hemangiopericytoma/solitaryfibrous tumor: report
of a 12-year asymptomatic follow-up. Int Urol Nephrol. 2014;46:483–6.
Bruzzone A, Varaldo M, Ferrarazzo C, Tunesi G, Mencoboni M. Solitary
fibrous tumor. Solitary fibrous tumor. Rare Tumors. 2010;2(4):e64.
Shanbhogue AK, Prasad SR, Takahashi N, Vikram R, Zaheer A, Sandrasegaran
K. Somatic and visceral solitary fibrous tumors in the abdomen and pelvis:
cross-sectional imaging spectrum. Radiographics. 2011;31:393–408.
Cheng SH, Wang SS, Lee CH, Ou YC, Cheng CL. Malignant solitary fibrous
tumor of the urinary bladder. J Chin Med Assoc. 2012;75:479–82.
Spairani C, Squillaci S, Pitino A, Ferrar M, Montefiore F, Rossi C, et al. A case
of concomitant occurrence of solitary fibrous tumor and urothelial
high-grade invasive carcinoma of the urinary bladder. Int J Surg Path.
2014;22:252–9.
Park SB, Park YS, Kim JK, Kim MH, Oh YT, Kim KA, et al. Solitary fibrous tumor
of the genitourinary tract. AJR Am J Roentgenol. 2011;196(2):W132–7.
Chmielecki J, Crago MA, Rosenberg M, O’Connor R, Walker SR, Ambrogio L.
Whole-exome sequencing identifies a recurrent fusion in solitary fibrous
tumors. Nat Genet. 2013;45:2.

10. Mohajeri A, Tayebwa J, Collin A, Nilsson J, Magnusson L, von Steyern FV,
et al. Comprehensive genetic analysis identifies a pathognomonic NAB/
STAT6 fusion gene, nonrandom secondary genomic imbalances, and a
characteristic gene expression profile in solitary fibrous tumor. Genes
Chromosomes Cancer. 2013;52(10):873–86.
Joe BN, Bolaris M, Horvai A, Yeh BM, Coakley FV, Meng MV. Solitary fibrous
tumor of the male pelvis: findings at CT with histopathologic correlation.
Clin Imaging. 2008;32(5):403–6.

11.

12. Park MS, Ravi V, Conley A, Patel SR, Trent JC. The role of chemotherapy in

advanced solitary fibrous tumors: a retrospective analysis. Clin Sarcoma Res.
2013;3:7.

Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central
and take full advantage of: 

• Convenient online submission

• Thorough peer review

• No space constraints or color ﬁgure charges

• Immediate publication on acceptance

• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar

• Research which is freely available for redistribution

Submit your manuscript at 
www.biomedcentral.com/submit

