Wang et al. Journal of Medical Case Reports  (2015) 9:99 
DOI 10.1186/s13256-015-0515-x

JOURNAL OF MEDICAL
CASE REPORTS

CA SE R EP O R T
Open Access
Giant congenital lower lip nevus restored by local
advanced skin flap: a case report
Liang Wang†, Dongyun Yang†, Liang Chen, Ling Tao, Jianyi Liu, Xia Dai and Shirong Li*

Abstract

Introduction: A congenital lower lip nevus is common, but a lower lip length lesion of more than 40% is hard to
excise simply, without any distortion. We designed a lower lip bilateral advanced skin flap to restore the wound
surface after completely and successfully removing the nevus.
Case presentation: A 13-year-old Mongolian girl was referred to us with a giant congenital lower lip nevus. The
lesion covered nearly half of her lower lip. We designed a lower lip bilateral advanced skin flap to restore the
wound surface, after completely removing the nevus without advanced repair.
Conclusions: This case report demonstrates a case of a lower lip length defect of more than 40%, repaired by
direct closure without dysfunction. It was a successful attempt that minimized the subsequent scar and dysfunction.
Keywords: Nevus, Lip defect, Local advanced skin flap, Reconstruction

Introduction
Lower lip bilateral advanced skin flaps consist of sen-
sate lip tissue with a minimized scar, but are generally
restricted to the reconstruction of defects comprising
of one third of the lower lip or less, in order to avoid
microstomia. Reconstruction of larger defects usually
involves Karapandzic flaps or other longer incisional
advancement flaps, or free tissue transfer.

Case presentation
In July 2011, a 13-year-old Mongolian girl was referred
to us with giant congenital lower lip nevus. The lesion
measured 3cm in the transverse diameter and covered
nearly half of her lower lip. It had an even and hairy
appearance, beginning at the median mouth mucosa of
her left lower lip, extending inferiorly downward and
encompassing much of her left lower white lip. The le-
sion was well circumscribed and asymptomatic (Figure 1).
We removed it for esthetic purposes and its potential of
forming malignancies.

We designed a lower lip bilateral advanced skin flap to
restore the wound surface after completely removing the

* Correspondence: 362406815@qq.com
†Equal contributors
Department of Plastic and Reconstructive Surgery, Southwest Hospital of
Third Military Medical University, 30 Gaotanyan Main Street, Shapingba
District, Chongqing 400038, People’s Republic of China

nevus; an Abbe flap was then prepared from her upper
lip. Full-thickness wedge excision was performed on
the lesion, including mucosa, orbicularis oris, and skin
(Figure 2). We successfully used the bilateral advanced
skin flap to restore the defect (Figure 3). The upper
lip Abbe flap was not used. At 10 days postoperatively,
her mouth opening was restricted, and the restriction
was relieved 20 days later (at 30 days postoperatively).
The results were satisfactory at 34 months postopera-
tively (Figure 4).

Discussion
Since the mid-19th century, more than 200 different
reconstruction techniques of the lower lip have been
described [1]. The fact that so many techniques exist for
lip reconstruction suggests the absence of one single
method that is fully satisfactory and accepted by all [2].
The method with less postoperative distortion and scar-
ring will be the superior method. In classic textbooks,
direct closure of lip defects without distortion is pos-
sible, provided the defect involves one third or less of
the lower lip length or one quarter of the upper lip [3,4].
If more than 30% of the lip tissue is missing, direct clos-
ure may not be possible and extensive constructive
methods must be applied [5]. Only lip hemangiomas

© 2015 Wang et al.; licensee BioMed Central. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and
reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly credited. The Creative Commons Public Domain
Dedication waiver (http://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/) applies to the data made available in this article,
unless otherwise stated.

Wang et al. Journal of Medical Case Reports  (2015) 9:99 

Page 2 of 3

Figure 1 Preoperative view of lesion. a. the external surface. b. the inner surface.

allow for a more aggressive resection, due to the signifi-
cant displacement of the adjacent normal tissue, with
less postoperative distortion than would traditionally be
expected for nevi or malignancies [6].

Ebrahimi et al. [7] believed that in patients with a
defect of 30 to 50% in size, and if the defect was located
in central-lateral part of lower lip, a reversed Abbe flap
from the upper lip and a step-ladder flap should be used.
In patients with a defect of 50 to 80% in size, a bilateral
Karapandzic flap and double reversed Abbe flap should
be used. Roldán et al. [8] believed that a defect involving
less than one third of the lip could be closed primarily
after wedge excision. If the defect was up to two thirds
of the lip in size, the Webster method, step technique,
or such techniques combined with a cuneiform Abbe
flap could be used for reconstruction of the lower lip.

Figure 2 Intraoperative view of the lesion.

Figure 3 Immediately after the operation. a. the view of closed position of mouth. b. the view of opening position of mouth.

Figure 4 Results at 34 months postoperatively. a. the view of closed position of mouth. b. the view of smile.

Wang et al. Journal of Medical Case Reports  (2015) 9:99 

Page 3 of 3

Doubtlessly, these extensive reconstructive methods will
lead to more scarring in our patient. Therefore, the dir-
ect closure of a defect covering nearly half of the lower
lip is a better choice, but a challenge for the surgeon.

With regards to the traditional treatment methods, we
were unsure as to whether the defect could be restored
by direct closure. Thus, we also designed the upper lip
Abbe flap for advanced repair in case this would be
necessary. The vermilion was easy to close after lesion
excision was performed, while her white lip remained.
An assisted incision was performed along the vermilion
border of her lower lip, and the bilateral white-lipped
skin flap was extensively undermined. In performing the
repair in this manner, the defect was restored by a bilat-
eral white-lipped advanced skin flap with fitness tension.
After 30 days, her gape function was retained. In our
case, we used the bilateral advanced skin flap to cover
more than 40% of lost tissue on her lower lip success-
fully, without any dysfunction. This successful approach
suggests a new way of performing major surgery of the
lower lip.

Conclusions
In conclusion, doctors may encounter such cases of
lower lip length defects more than 40% in size, and
because of traditional treatment methods, they tend to
reconstruct
the defect using the reversed Abbe flap
taken from upper lip, the step-ladder flap, the Webster
method, or other more invasive methods. We describe a
case of a lower lip length defect of more than 40% in
size, repaired by direct closure, without dysfunction. It
was a successful attempt that minimized scarring and
dysfunction. We hope that our case report will provide a
new treatment option to consider when doctors are
faced with such a tissue defect.

Consent
Written informed consent was obtained from the patient
and her mother for publication of this case report and
any accompanying images. A copy of the written consent
is available for review by the Editor-in-Chief of this
journal.

Competing interests
The authors declare that they have no competing interests.

Authors’ contributions
LW drafted the manuscript and assisted the operation. DY performed the
operation. LC, LT, JL, and XD conducted literature review and followed up on
our patient. SL designed the surgery and revised the article. All authors read
and approved the final manuscript.

Received: 22 July 2014 Accepted: 7 January 2015

References
1.

Brusati R. Reconstruction of the labial commissure by sliding U-shaped
cheek flap. J Maxillofac Surg. 1979;7:11.

2.

Herrera E, Bosch RJ, Barrera MV. Reconstruction of the lower lip: Bernard
technique and its variants. Dermatol Surg. 2008;34(5):648–55.

3. Malcolm AL, Andrew DS. Lower third face and lip reconstruction. In: Mathes

4.

5.

6.

7.

8.

SJ, editor. Plastic surgery.Vol. 3. Philadelphia: Saunders; 2006. p. 806.
Langstein HN, Robb GL. Lip and perioral reconstruction. Clin Plast Surg.
2005;32:431–45.
Lesavoy MA. Lip deformities and their reconstruction. In: Lesavoy MA, editor.
Reconstruction of the head and neck. Baltimore: Lippincott Williams &
Wilkins; 1981. p. 95.
Li WY, Chaudhry O, Reinisch JF. Guide to early surgical management of lip
hemangiomas based on our experience of 214 cases. Plast Reconstr Surg.
2011;128(5):1117–24.
Ebrahimi A, Maghsoudnia GR, Arshadi AA. Prospective comparative study of
lower lip defects reconstruction with different local flaps. J Craniofac Surg.
2011;22(6):2255–9.
Roldán JC, Teschke M, Fritzer E, Dunsche A, Härle F, Wiltfang J, et al.
Reconstruction of the lower lip: rationale to preserve the aesthetic units of
the face. Plast Reconstr Surg. 2007;120(5):1231–9.

Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central
and take full advantage of: 

• Convenient online submission

• Thorough peer review

• No space constraints or color ﬁgure charges

• Immediate publication on acceptance

• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar

• Research which is freely available for redistribution

Submit your manuscript at 
www.biomedcentral.com/submit

