Nakahira et al. Journal of Medical Case Reports  (2015) 9:53 
DOI 10.1186/s13256-014-0512-5

JOURNAL OF MEDICAL
CASE REPORTS

CA SE R EP O R T
Fibrin glue on an aortic cusp detected by
transesophageal echocardiography after valve-
sparing aortic valve replacement: a case report
Junko Nakahira1*, Hisanari Ishii2, Toshiyuki Sawai1 and Toshiaki Minami1

Open Access

Abstract

Introduction: Fibrin glue is used commonly during cardiac surgery but can behave as an intracardiac abnormal
foreign body following surgery. There have been few such cases reported, and they were typically noticed only
because of the resulting catastrophic cardiac conditions, such as valvular malfunction. We report a case where, for
the first time, transesophageal echocardiography was used to detected fibrin glue that was adherent to the
ventricular side of a patient’s aortic valve immediately after aortic declamping.
Case presentation: A 45-year-old Japanese man with Marfan syndrome underwent an aortic valve-sparing operation
to treat moderate aortic valve regurgitation resulting from enlargement of his right coronary cusp. Fibrin glue was
lightly applied to the suture line between the previous and new grafts. Transesophageal echocardiography performed
prior to weaning from the cardiopulmonary bypass revealed mild aortic valve regurgitation in addition to a mobile
membranous structure attached to the ventricular side of his aortic valve. It was identified as fibrin glue. We resolved
the regurgitation by removing the fibrin glue and repeating the aortic cusp plication. The patient had no complications
during recovery.
Conclusions: Fibrin glue can act as an intracardiac foreign body and lead to a potentially fatal embolism. We
demonstrated the use of transesophageal echocardiography to detect a fibrin glue-derived intracardiac abnormal
foreign body and to confirm its removal. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first case where fibrin glue adherent
to the aortic valve was detected by transesophageal echocardiography. These findings demonstrate the importance of
using transesophageal echocardiography during cardiac surgery that involves using biological glues.
Keywords: Biological glue, Fibrin glue, Transesophageal echocardiography

Introduction
Various intracardiac abnormal bodies have been re-
ported,
including air masses, gauze threads [1,2], and
mitral valve chordae entrapped in prosthetic valves [3].
Postoperative valvular malfunction and embolization of
the coronary arteries because of biological glue have also
been reported and appeared as catastrophic cardiac con-
ditions [4-6]. To the best of our knowledge, ours is the
first report of biological glue on an aortic valve fluttering
in the cardiac chamber. The biological glue was removed
from the aortic valve to avoid it becoming an embolus

* Correspondence: ane052@poh.osaka-med.ac.jp
1Department of Anesthesiology, Osaka Medical College, 2-7 Daigaku-machi,
Takatsuki, Osaka 569-8686, Japan
Full list of author information is available at the end of the article

and transesophageal echocardiography (TEE) was the
only approach able to detect the silent abnormality.

Case presentation
A 45-year-old Japanese man with Marfan syndrome was
scheduled for an aortic valve-sparing operation because
of moderate aortic valve regurgitation resulting from en-
largement of his right coronary cusp. He had previously
undergone aortic arch replacement and valvuloplasty of
a non-coronary cusp with a patch to correct aortic dis-
section and moderate aortic valve regurgitation through
a tear in the non-coronary cusp.

After induction of anesthesia, an inflow duct for car-
diopulmonary bypass (CPB) was placed in his right sub-
clavian artery. Outflow ducts were placed in his superior
vena cava and inferior vena cava. An aortic root cannula

© 2015 Nakahira et al.; licensee BioMed Central. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and
reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly credited. The Creative Commons Public Domain
Dedication waiver (http://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/) applies to the data made available in this article,
unless otherwise stated.

Nakahira et al. Journal of Medical Case Reports  (2015) 9:53 

Page 2 of 3

Figure 1 Two-dimensional transesophageal echocardiography
image. This long-axis view of the aortic valve shows a mobile
membranous structure attached to the aortic valve (yellow arrow).
Ao, aorta; LA, left atrium; LV, left ventricle.

was inserted into the ascending aortic graft, and the as-
cending aorta was then clamped. Aortic valve-sparing for
root replacement was performed during CPB at 34°C.
Mattress sutures with 2–0 Ethibond® (Ethicon, Somerville,
NJ, USA) and 4–0 Prolene® (Ethicon) were used for plica-
tion of the commissures of the aortic cusps. For central
plication of the cusps 6–0 Prolene was used. Mattress su-
tures with 4–0 Prolene were used for the edge of the artifi-
cial aortic graft. The anastomoses between the patient’s
sinuses of Valsalva and the graft as well as the coronary ar-
teries and the graft were closed with over-and-over 4–0
Prolene sutures (the latter with felt). Biological glue was
applied for hemostasis at the anastomosis sites. It was
lightly rubbed and sprayed on the suture line between the
previous and new grafts (Vascutek® Gelweave Valsalva™;
Terumo, Scotland). Approximately 5mL of Bolheal®
(Chemo-Sero-Therapeutic Research Institute, Kumamoto,
Japan) was used. Fibrinogen solution (5mL) and thrombin
solution (5mL), components of fibrin glue, were also
applied. Because of difficulty achieving hemostasis,

Figure 2 Three-dimensional transesophageal echocardiography
image. This short-axis view of the aorta shows a mobile structure
fluttering in the sinus of Valsalva of the left coronary cusp (yellow
arrow). LCC, left coronary cusp; NCC, non-coronary cusp; RCC, right
coronary cusp.

approximately 5mL of BioGlue® (CryoLife Inc., Kennesaw,
GA, USA) was also used. A leak test of the aortic valve
with water revealed no leakage on TEE. However, immedi-
ately after aortic declamping and before weaning from
CPB, TEE detected mild aortic valve regurgitation and a
mobile membranous structure attached to the aortic valve
on the ventricular side of the valve (Figure 1). A short-axis
view of the aortic valve showed that the structure was

Figure 3 Photograph of the biological glue. The arrowheads designate the biological glue that was attached to the ventricular side of the left
coronary cusp (A) and after easy removal (B).

Nakahira et al. Journal of Medical Case Reports  (2015) 9:53 

Page 3 of 3

attached to the left coronary cusp (Figure 2). Two videos
show this in more detail (Additional files 1 and 2). We
considered the possibility that the abnormal structure was
fibrin glue, so the aorta was immediately clamped to avoid
arterial embolization of the structure. Following induced
cardiac arrest, surgeons opened the anastomoses between
the grafts and found a small fibrin clot on the ventricular
side of the left coronary cusp (Figure 3). After the fibrin
clot was removed, aortic cusp plication was repeated with
slight adjustment of the effective heights of the cusps.
When weaning from the CPB, we found no further abnor-
mal structures or aortic valve regurgitation. The operating
time was 9.5 hours, anesthesia time was 11 hours, and
CPB time was 5.5 hours. During the operation we trans-
fused 400mL of autologous blood that had been stored
preoperatively, 4 units (560mL) of packed red blood cells,
8 units (960mL) of fresh frozen plasma, 20 units (400mL)
of platelets, and 500mL of 5% albumin.

The postoperative course was uneventful. The patient
was extubated on the first postoperative day (POD) and
was discharged on POD 17. At his 3-month follow-up,
echocardiography and computed tomography scans were
obtained. He showed neither inflammation nor a pseu-
doaneurysm at the anastomotic site.

Discussion
Surgical glue is commonly used during cardiac surgery,
especially for surgery of the aorta and aortic valve [7]. In
our case, biological glues were not applied for the intra-
cardiac structures but were rubbed and sprayed along
the suture lines outside the aortic grafts. We have specu-
lated that the biological glue leaked into the sinuses of
Valsalva through the needle holes and attached to the
left coronary cusp of the aortic valve.

Postoperative TEE detected the biological glue as an
abnormal foreign body. The glue could have embolized a
peripheral artery as a left atrial embolus [8-10]. Emboli
of limb arteries [11] have been reported previously. Our
patient remained stable, and we assumed that weaning
from CPB would be uneventful. Being cautious, however,
we used TEE to determine if there was an aortic valve
leak before weaning. We detected leakage and the bio-
logical glue.

Our case illustrates the importance of a comprehen-
sive TEE study during aorta and aortic valve surgery and
before weaning from CPB. It is able not only to evaluate
the results of the procedure but also to detect foreign
bodies and other abnormalities, thereby avoiding postop-
erative complications.

Conclusions
Biological glue can become a foreign body in cardiac
chambers. Intraoperative TEE is the only approach to
detecting this abnormality in a stable situation.

2.

3.

4.

5.

6.

8.

9.

10.

Consent
Written informed consent was obtained from the patient
for publication of this case report and any accompanying
images. A copy of the written consent is available for re-
view by the Editor-in-Chief of this journal.

Additional files

Additional file 1: Two-dimensional long-axis view of the aortic
valve. A mobile membranous structure was attached to the aortic valve.
Ao, aorta; LA, left atrium; LV, left ventricle.
Additional file 2: Three-dimensional short-axis view of the aortic
valve. A mobile structure flutters in the sinus of Valsalva of the left
coronary cusp. Ao, aorta; left coronary cusp; LV, left ventricle; NCC,
non-coronary cusp; RCC, right coronary cusp.

Abbreviations
CPB: Cardiopulmonary bypass; POD: Postoperative day; TEE: Transesophageal
echocardiography.

Competing interests
The authors declare that they have no competing interests.

Authors’ contributions
JN collected the data and wrote the case report. HI helped in the
echocardiographic interpretation and writing the manuscript. TS assisted in
the literature review. TM revised and approved the manuscript. All authors
read and approved the final manuscript.

Author details
1Department of Anesthesiology, Osaka Medical College, 2-7 Daigaku-machi,
Takatsuki, Osaka 569-8686, Japan. 2Department of Anesthesia, Tenri Hospital,
200 Mishima-cho, Tenri, Nara 632-8555, Japan.

Received: 13 September 2014 Accepted: 30 December 2014

References
1.

Adams MS, Alston TA, Walker JD. Detection of an ill-poised thread of lint by
transesophageal echocardiography after aortic valve replacement. Anesth
Analg. 2006;103:40.
Fischi M, Narins CR. Coronary embolization of a gauze fragment: a
cautionary case report. Catheter Cardiovasc Interv. 2005;66:570–2.
Sawai T, Nakahira J, Shimoyama Y, Oka M, Imanaka H, Minami T. Prosthetic
valve malfunction caused by chordal entrapment detected by transesophageal
echocardiography. J Cardiothorac Vasc Anesth. 2011;25:495–7.
Gillham MJ, Tousignant CP. Diagnosis by intraoperative transesophageal
echocardiography of acute thrombosis of mechanical aortic valve prosthesis
associated with the use of biological glue. Anesth Analg. 2001;92:1123–5.
Birmingham B. TEE diagnosis of mechanical AVR dysfunction associated
with biological glue. Anesth Analg. 2001;93:1627–8.
Trivi M, Albertal J, Vaccarino G, Albertal M, Navia D. Ostial stenosis after
Bentall technique using glue: percutaneous stenting may be ineffective.
Interact Cardiovasc Thorac Surg. 2007;6:511–3.

7. McCarthy PM. Fibrin glue in cardiothoracic surgery. Transfus Med Rev.

1993;7:173–9.
Sidhu S, Goyer C, Hatzakorzian R, Olivier JF, Devarennes B, Cote AV, et al.
Transesophageal echocardiographic detection of intracardiac BioGlue
postmitral valve replacement. Anesth Analg. 2007;105:1572–3.
Alvarez RJ, Quiroga SJ, de Alegria MA, Dominguez DC. Pulmonary embolism
due to biological glue after repair of type A aortic dissection. Interact
Cardiovasc Thorac Surg. 2011;12:650–1.
Fletcher NS, Mandal K, Jahangiri M. Surgical glue resembling left atrial
thrombus. Interact Cardiovasc Thorac Surg. 2004;3:409–10.

11. Bernabeu E, Castellá M, Barriuso C, Mulet J. Acute limb ischemia due to
embolization of biological glue after repair of type A aortic dissection.
Interact Cardiovasc Thorac Surg. 2005;4:329–31.

