Chen et al. Journal of Medical Case Reports  (2015) 9:66 
DOI 10.1186/s13256-015-0539-2

JOURNAL OF MEDICAL
CASE REPORTS

CA SE R EP O R T
Pathology characteristics of ocular von
Hippel-Lindau disease with neovascularization of
the iris and cornea: a case report
Shida Chen1,2, Emily Y Chew3 and Chi-Chao Chan1*

Open Access

Abstract

Introduction: Retinal hemangioblastoma is one of the most common tumors in von Hippel-Lindau disease. In
addition to the classical pathological characteristics of von Hippel-Lindau disease, we report, for what we believe to
be the first time, a severe and rare ocular complication characterized by neovascularization in the cornea and iris.
Case presentation: A 41-year-old white man with a long history of retinal hemangioblastoma presented with
neovascularization of his iris and cornea as well as corneal perforation. His right eye was blind and painful,
leading to a decision of enucleation. On microscopy, the enucleated eye showed neovascularization of the
cornea and iris. The cornea was perforated with an expulsive hemorrhage and extruding intraocular contents,
including the retina. A large retinal hemangioblastoma was located at the posterior pole adjacent to the optic
nerve head. The tumor was mainly composed of large cells with foamy cytoplasm. Bone formation was also present.
Conclusion: Our pathology findings were consistent with previously described features of retinal hemangioblastoma.
The present case is unusual because of the co-existing neovascularization in the iris and cornea, which may have led to
corneal perforation and vision loss.
Keywords: Cornea, Iris, Neovascularization, Retinal hemangioblastoma, von Hippel-Lindau disease

Introduction
Von Hippel-Lindau disease (VHL) is an autosomal dom-
inant systemic syndrome that results from a mutation in
the VHL gene on chromosome 3 (3p25-26) [1]. Disrup-
tion of VHL protein function leads to an accumulation
of hypoxia-inducible transcription factor 1α (HIF-1α),
which induces overproduction of its target genes, includ-
ing vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF), platelet-
derived growth factor - beta (PDGFB), and transforming
growth factor alpha (TGFA). The growth factors are also
shown to contribute to the formation of tumors [1,2].
Retinal hemangioblastoma is seen in more than 60% of
patients with VHL disease [3]. Approximately half of pa-
tients with retinal hemangioblastoma have bilateral involve-
ment. The prominent ocular complications of retinal
hemangioblastoma are retinal exudate and tractional retinal
detachment [4]. On pathology, retinal hemangioblastoma

* Correspondence: chanc@nei.nih.gov
1Immunopathology Section, Laboratory of Immunology, National Eye
Institute, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, USA
Full list of author information is available at the end of the article

appears as a network of thin vascular capillary-like channels
lined by endothelial cells and pericytes. These vascular
channels are separated by foamy VHL-associated tumor
cells, also known as stromal cells [5,6]. Complications out-
side the retina are uncommon in VHL disease.

We report, for what we believe to be the first time, the
pathological characteristics of a case of retinal heman-
gioblastoma with neovascularization involving the iris
and cornea. The study was approved by the National Eye
Institute Institutional Review Board for human subjects,
and our patient signed an informed consent.

Case presentation
A 41-year-old white man was diagnosed with VHL with
multiple retinal hemangioblastomas in 1987 at the age
of 17 years. He received thermal laser and cryotherapy
treatment for a retinal hemangioblastoma in his right
eye in 1992. The tumor progressed and upon examin-
ation in June 2007 he had no light perception in his right
eye, with a completely obscured fundus. On examination
in April 2011, there was still no light perception in his

© 2015 Chen et al.; licensee BioMed Central. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and
reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly credited. The Creative Commons Public Domain
Dedication waiver (http://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/) applies to the data made available in this article,
unless otherwise stated.

Chen et al. Journal of Medical Case Reports  (2015) 9:66 

Page 2 of 4

Figure 1 Clinical photographs of the eye from the patient with von Hippel-Lindau disease. (A) The right eye shows neovascularization of
the cornea and iris (rubeosis iridis) and matured cataract. (B) The left eye shows a hemangioblastoma involving the optic nerve.

right eye; his intraocular pressure was 52mmHg; and
band keratopathy, rubeosis iridis, and dense cataracts
were present (Figure 1A). On examination in July 2012,
his right eye was blind and painful with an intraocular
pressure of 48mmHg and a corneal ulcer. The vision in
his left eye was 20/20, and the fundus showed evidence
of a retinal hemangioblastoma involving the optic nerve
and the presence of retinal exudates (Figure 1B). He
underwent enucleation of the blind and painful right eye
in November 2013.

The enucleated eye was sent to the National Eye Institute
for pathological examination. Routine histopathology and
immunohistochemistry were performed on the enucleated
right globe. Macroscopically, the cornea was perforated by
an expulsive hemorrhage. The anterior chamber was com-
pletely occluded by a pupillary membrane admixed with
intraocular contents and extensive hemorrhaging. The vit-
reous cavity was filled with hemorrhage, and the retina
was poorly identified. There was bone tissue admixed with
hemorrhages in the posterior pole. The optic nerve also
contained hemorrhage. On microscopy, the cornea was
perforated centrally, where the hemorrhage was mixed
with the exposed intraocular contents including the uvea
and retina. Most of the remaining corneal epithelium
showed changes in epidermalization, and there was

extensive neovascularization with small hemorrhages
at the anterior corneal surface (Figure 2A). Consequently,
immunostaining for VEGF was positive at the corneal sur-
face (Figure 2C). The atrophic iris was disorganized and
adhered to the Descemet’s membrane. Additionally, the
surface of the iris showed neovascularization (Figure 2B).
The retina was totally detached, disorganized, and showed
marked gliosis.

A large retinal hemangioblastoma was noted at the
optic nerve head (Figure 3A). The tumor was mainly com-
posed of large cells with foamy cytoplasm (Figure 3A).
Within the retinal hemangioblastoma, there were focal
areas of cystic degeneration, gliosis, and hemorrhage.
There was osseous transformation beneath the hemangio-
blastoma, mixed with gliofibrous tissues in some areas
(Figure 3A). Expression of VEGF and HIF-1α was strongly
positive within the hemangioblastoma and in the optic
nerve (Figure 3B,C). Large hemorrhages beneath the chor-
oid were observed.

Discussion
Ocular complications of retinal hemangioblastoma are
predominantly exudative (25%) or involve tractional ret-
inal detachment (9%) [7]. Retinal or vitreous hemorrhages
are rare and only occur in fewer than 3% of cases; anterior

Figure 2 Photomicrographs of neovascularization in the cornea and iris. (A) The corneal epithelium shows epidermalization. Many small
vascular lumina (arrows) are located in the corneal subepithelial region. (B) Small vascular lumina (arrows) are present superficially and in the
surface of the iris. (C) The anterior cornea shows high expression of vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF). (A and B, hematoxylin and eosin,
original magnification, ×200; C, avidin-biotin complex immunohistochemistry, original magnification, ×200).

Chen et al. Journal of Medical Case Reports  (2015) 9:66 

Page 3 of 4

Figure 3 Photomicrographs of retinal hemangioblastoma. (A) The retinal hemangioblastoma was composed of classical foamy (tumor) cells
admixed with small capillaries. Osseous tissues (asterisks) are adjacent to the retinal hemangioblastoma. (B) The hemangioblastoma shows
high expression of vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF). (C) Hypoxia-inducible transcription factor 1α (HIF-1α) is expressed in the
retinal hemangioblastoma. (A, hematoxylin and eosin, original magnification, ×200; B and C, avidin-biotin complex immunohistochemistry,
original magnification, ×200).

segment complications such as cataract and neovascular
glaucoma are also rare but have been found to occur dur-
ing the end-stage of the disease [4,7]. Though ocular VHL
disease can sometimes manifest as retinal neovasculariza-
tion characterized by fine, superficial vascular proliferation
[8], neovascularization in non-retinal tissues is rare. It has
been found that only 2% of eyes with retinal hemangio-
blastomas also show neovascularization in the iris [4]. To
the best of our knowledge, no cases of severe corneal neo-
vascularization and perforation associated with retinal
hemangioblastoma have been reported. Although retinal
capillary hemangioblastomas are slow growing and benign
in nature, they can sometimes result in vision loss and dis-
ruption of the structural integrity of the globe through
exudative and tractional effects on the retina [4]. This type
of severe visual impairment is more likely to be associated
with increased age, the presence of juxtapapillary lesions,
and the increased number and extent of peripheral lesions
[3]. In our case, his right eye developed total retinal
detachment, hemorrhage in the vitreous and subretinal
space, neovascularization of the iris and cornea, and cor-
neal perforation; the combination of these symptoms led
to the painful blind eye.

Typically, retinal hemangioblastomas comprise capillary-
like vascular channels surrounded by large vacuolated stro-
mal cells [9,10]. In our case, we found similar pathological
features in the retinal hemangioblastoma as well as osse-
ous bone formation around the tumor, correlating with
the prolonged history of the disease.

High levels of VEGF are believed to contribute to heman-
gioblastoma formation; in animal models where VEGF is
overexpressed or where VHL is inactive, visceral lesions
resembling hemangioblastomas form [11,12]. High levels
of VEGF have also been reported in the ocular fluid and
tumors of patients with VHL [6,13]. We detected high ex-
pression of VEGF at the site of corneal neovascularization
and within the retinal hemangioblastoma of our patient.
Further, HIF-1α expression was increased within the ret-
inal hemangioblastoma, which is consistent with previous
findings that there are many HIF transcripts in retinal

hemangioblastomas [14]. This information suggests there
may be potential therapeutic implications of targeting
HIF-1α in VHL disease [15].

Conclusion
Co-existing ocular complications of the retinal heman-
gioblastoma occur relatively infrequently. We present a
case with these clinicopathological
including
neovascularization of the iris and cornea.

features,

Consent
Written informed consent was obtained from the patient
for publication of this case report and the accompanying
images. A copy of the written consent is available for
review by the Editor-in-Chief of this journal.

Abbreviation
HIF-1α: hypoxia-inducible transcription factor α; VEGF: vascular endothelial
growth factor; VHL: von Hippel-Lindau disease.

Competing interests
The authors declare that they have no competing interests.

Authors’ contributions
SC performed the pathological examination and wrote the manuscript. EC
provided patient care and clinical information, obtained the specimen, and
reviewed the manuscript. CCC designed and supervised the study,
interpreted pathological findings, and critically reviewed the manuscript. All
authors read and approved the final manuscript.

Acknowledgements
The National Eye Institute Intramural Research program supported the study.
We thank Mr Nicholas Popp for editing the manuscript and Ms Michelle Roof
for performing the immunohistochemistry.

Author details
1Immunopathology Section, Laboratory of Immunology, National Eye
Institute, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, USA. 2Zhongshan
Ophthalmic Center, Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, China. 3Division of
Epidemiology and Clinical Research, National Eye Institute, National Institutes
of Health, Bethesda, MD, USA.

Received: 19 August 2014 Accepted: 30 January 2015

References
1.

Kaelin Jr WG. Molecular basis of the VHL hereditary cancer syndrome. Nat
Rev Cancer. 2002;2:673–82.

Chen et al. Journal of Medical Case Reports  (2015) 9:66 

Page 4 of 4

2.

Lonser RR, Glenn GM, Walther M, Chew EY, Libutti SK, Linehan WM, et al.
von Hippel-Lindau disease. Lancet. 2003;361:2059–67.

3. Wong WT, Agron E, Coleman HR, Tran T, Reed GF, Csaky K, et al. Clinical

characterization of retinal capillary hemangioblastomas in a large
population of patients with von Hippel-Lindau disease. Ophthalmology.
2008;115:181–8.

4. Webster AR, Maher ER, Moore AT. Clinical characteristics of ocular

angiomatosis in von Hippel-Lindau disease and correlation with germline
mutation. Arch Ophthalmol. 1999;117:371–8.

5. Mottow-Lippa L, Tso MO, Peyman GA, Chejfec G. von Hippel angiomatosis.

A light, electron microscopic, and immunoperoxidase characterization.
Ophthalmology. 1983;90:848–55.
Chan CC, Vortmeyer AO, Chew EY, Green WR, Matteson DM, Shen DF, et al.
VHL gene deletion and enhanced VEGF gene expression detected in the
stromal cells of retinal angioma. Arch Ophthalmol. 1999;117:625–30.
Singh AD, Shields CL, Shields JA. von Hippel-Lindau disease. Surv Ophthalmol.
2001;46:117–42.

6.

7.

8. Wong WT, Yeh S, Chan CC, Kalina RE, Kinyoun JL, Folk JC, et al. Retinal

vascular proliferation as an ocular manifestation of von Hippel-Lindau
disease. Arch Ophthalmol. 2008;126:637–43.
Chan CC, Collins AB, Chew EY. Molecular pathology of eyes with von
Hippel-Lindau (VHL) Disease: a review. Retina. 2007;27:1–7.

9.

10. Grossniklaus HE, Thomas JW, Vigneswaran N, Jarrett 3rd WH. Retinal

hemangioblastoma. A histologic, immunohistochemical, and ultrastructural
evaluation. Ophthalmology. 1992;99:140–5.

11. Benjamin LE, Keshet E. Conditional switching of vascular endothelial growth

factor (VEGF) expression in tumors: induction of endothelial cell shedding
and regression of hemangioblastoma-like vessels by VEGF withdrawal. Proc
Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1997;94:8761–6.

12. Haase VH, Glickman JN, Socolovsky M, Jaenisch R. Vascular tumors in livers
with targeted inactivation of the von Hippel-Lindau tumor suppressor. Proc
Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2001;98:1583–8.
Los M, Aarsman CJ, Terpstra L, Wittebol-Post D, Lips CJ, Blijham GH, et al.
Elevated ocular levels of vascular endothelial growth factor in patients with
von Hippel-Lindau disease. Ann Oncol. 1997;8:1015–22.

13.

14. Chan CC, Lee YS, Zhuang Z, Hackett J, Chew EY. Von Hippel-Lindau gene
deletion and expression of hypoxia-inducible factor and ubiquitin in optic
nerve hemangioma. Trans Am Ophthalmol Soc. 2004;102:75–9. discussion
79–81.

15. Wang Y, Abu-Asab MS, Shen D, Zhuang Z, Chew EY, Chan CC. Upregulation
of hypoxia-inducible factors and autophagy in von Hippel-Lindau-associated
retinal hemangioblastoma. Graefes Arch Clin Exp Ophthalmol. 2014;252:1319–27.

Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central
and take full advantage of: 

• Convenient online submission

• Thorough peer review

• No space constraints or color ﬁgure charges

• Immediate publication on acceptance

• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar

• Research which is freely available for redistribution

Submit your manuscript at 
www.biomedcentral.com/submit

