Bashir et al. Journal of Medical Case Reports  (2015) 9:96 
DOI 10.1186/s13256-015-0561-4

JOURNAL OF MEDICAL
CASE REPORTS

CA SE R EP O R T
Orbital dermatofibrosarcoma protuberans with
intracranial extension preceded by recurrent
leiomyoma of the orbit: a case report
Sanaullah Bashir1, Maryam Tariq1, Hafiz Muhammad Aslam1*, Abdul Sattar M Hashmi2, Baber Malik3,
Akhtar Amin1 and Sidra Mumtaz1

Open Access

Abstract

Introduction: Dermatofibrosarcoma protuberans is a rare, locally aggressive cutaneous tumor of intermediate to
low-grade malignancy. COL1A1-PDGFβ translocation is specific to dermatofibrosarcoma protuberans, where the
abnormally fused COL1A1-PDGFβ gene directs formation of an abnormal combined (fusion) protein that researchers
believe to ultimately function like the platelet-derived growth factor-beta protein.
Case presentation: In this report, we present a case of a 63-year-old Asian man with dermatofibrosarcoma
protuberans of the right orbit with intracranial extension. He had a prior history of recurrent leiomyomas at the
identical site. He underwent near-total en bloc resection of the tumor through a wide craniectomy with a 6cm rim
of the frontal scalp, allowing the tumor to be resected en bloc, leaving negative margins. Microscopically, the
tumor comprised spindle cells with mild nuclear atypia and a low mitotic index embedded in a spiraling pattern of
decussating fascicles consistent with dermatofibrosarcoma protuberans. The lesion was positive for CD34 and BCL2.
Following resection, the patient was started on imatinib mesylate therapy (800mg/day).
Conclusions: We propose that platelet-derived growth factor, which has been implicated in the progression of
leiomyomas by augmenting mitogenesis, may have acted in an autocrine manner to cause cell division, which
may have led to the development of dermatofibrosarcoma protuberans in our patient. Further research is
imperative to find certain molecular associations between the discussed soft tissue tumors. Also important is the
effective utilization of platelet-derived growth factor receptor kinase inhibitors to prevent transformation to any
platelet-derived growth factor–driven tumor, which in our patient was a dermatofibrosarcoma protuberans.
Keywords: Dermatofibrosarcoma protuberans, Leiomyoma, Orbital tumors, Soft tissue tumors

Introduction
Dermatofibrosarcoma protuberans (DFSP) is a rare spin-
dle cell tumor [1]. It accounts for less than 0.1% of all
the malignant lesions and only 1% of all soft tissue sar-
comas [2,3]. It is a cutaneous malignant neoplasm that
originates from the dermis [1] and extends into the sub-
cutaneous tissues and muscles [4]. Men are more fre-
quently affected than women. It occurs in all age groups,
most commonly in the second to fifth decades of life [5].
No exogenous risk factors are known to account for DFSP,
nor is there evidence of genetic inheritance. However,

* Correspondence: coolaslam8@hotmail.com
1Dow Medical College, Dow University of Health Sciences, Karachi, Pakistan
Full list of author information is available at the end of the article

studies have shown a reciprocal translocation between
chromosomes 17 and 22 (17q22; 22q13) in more than
90% of DFSP tumor cells.

Orbital

leiomyoma is another rare tumor. In 2004,
Gündüz and coworkers reported 16 cases of orbital leio-
myoma documented in the past 40 years, with men be-
ing predominantly affected [6]. Most of the tumors have
been deeply located within the orbit, with a slight predi-
lection for the inferior and medial quadrants [7].

Here we present a case of a patient with a DFSP that
was preceded by recurrent orbital leiomyoma. This makes
it significantly rare because both the uncommon forms of
tumor occurred in the same individual and, more remark-
ably, at almost the same location—the right orbit.

© 2015 Bashir et al.; licensee BioMed Central. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and
reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly credited. The Creative Commons Public Domain
Dedication waiver (http://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/) applies to the data made available in this article,
unless otherwise stated.

Bashir et al. Journal of Medical Case Reports  (2015) 9:96 

Page 2 of 5

Case presentation
A 63-year-old Asian man of low socioeconomic status
presented to our institution with a complaint of a 1-year
history of progressively enlarging swelling on the antero-
medial aspect of the right orbit that was causing prop-
tosis and complete vision loss of the ipsilateral eye. He
had a significant medical history of diabetes mellitus. He
had no constitutional or neurological symptoms and no
signs evocative of other sites of involvement. He had no
family history of cancer, smoking, intravenous drug abuse
or sexual promiscuity.

Eight years earlier, he had developed right orbital swell-
ing causing severe proptosis, diminished vision and re-
stricted eye movements. Computed tomography (CT)
revealed an extraconal mass measuring 3.3cm×3cm that
was causing erosion of the superior margin of the orbit
with right frontal sinus extension (Figures 1). An excisional
biopsy was done via the transcranial route, and the speci-
men was sent for histopathological examination. Grossly,
the tumor had a solid,
lobulated appearance. Micro-
scopically,
it consisted of bundles of spindle-shaped
cells with oval nuclei that had blunted ends interspersed
in fibrous stoma. Immunohistochemistry demonstrated
that the tumor had positive immunoreactivity to des-
min, vimentin and smooth muscle actin (SMA). On the
basis of immunohistopathology, the tumor was reported
as a leiomyoma. Five years later, the lesion recurred at
the identical site. An excisional biopsy was performed,
and the report again was consistent with leiomyoma
with positive immunoreactivity to desmin, vimentin and
SMA. An excisional biopsy was done via the transcra-
nial route, and the tumor was reported as leiomyoma.
Five years later, the lesion recurred at the identical site.
An excisional biopsy was performed, and the report
again was consistent with leiomyoma. Now, as the patient
presented, his physical examination was remarkable for a
palpable 8×9cm, fixed, non-tender, non-ulcerated, nodular
mass attached to the underlying structures. The overlying

skin was erythematous with prominent and dilated super-
ficial veins.

An ocular examination of the right eye revealed a
compressed eyeball, congested conjunctiva and restricted
eye movement with complete vision loss. The left eye
was normal, with 6/6 visual acuity.

CT of the brain demonstrated mild white matter ische-
mic changes, and CT of the orbit showed a well-defined,
lobulated soft tissue mass along the superomedial aspect
of the orbit measuring 5.3×4.8cm and extending 4.3cm
craniocaudally. The lesion displaced the eyeball inferolat-
erally and had both extraconal and intraconal components
involving the medial rectus muscle and abutting the optic
disc. Medially, partial obliteration of the right ethmoidal
sinus due to compression remodeling of the right lamina
papyracea was observed. Pressure remodeling of the su-
perior orbital roof was also observed (Figure 2).

After all aseptic measures were done, the tumor was
removed en masse. A right subfrontal incision was made
through the skin, and the supraorbital ridge was exposed.
A wide craniectomy was performed with a 6cm rim on
the frontal scalp, allowing the tumor to be resected en
bloc,
leaving negative margins. The tumor had eroded
through the roof and floor of the orbit superoinferiorly
and involved the maxillary sinus inferiorly. The tumor was
transected off the right eyeball, which was posteriorly
present and necrotized and compressed by the tumor. The
entire eyeball was removed, along with the optic nerve
and muscles, and a mega-maxillary antrostomy was cre-
ated. The resulting cavity was filled with oxidized cellulose
to prevent hemorrhage. A pericranial autograft was per-
formed. The defect was reconstructed using a titanium
mesh plate over the supraorbital part of skull.

Macroscopic inspection of the excised tumor revealed
a firm, homogeneous, tannish brown specimen measuring
12cm×13cm×15cm in aggregate. The cut surface was
fleshy and homogeneous and had no areas of hemorrhage.
Microscopically, the tumor comprised spindle cells with

Figure 1 Orbital computed tomographic scans showing leiomyoma. (A) Coronal image. (B) Axial image. These computed tomographic scans
reveal a well-defined soft tissue mass in the anterosuperior aspect of the right orbit (arrows in A and B). The mass is displacing the eyeball
anteroinferiorly (A). The lesion reveals mild enhancement with intravenous contrast dye and is displacing the medial rectus muscle laterally (B).
The left eyeball and rectobulbar spaces are normal.

Bashir et al. Journal of Medical Case Reports  (2015) 9:96 

Page 3 of 5

Figure 2 Orbital computed tomographic scans revealing dermatofibrosarcoma protuberans. (A) and (B) Coronal images. (C) and (D) Axial
images. These computed tomographic scans reveal a well-defined soft tissue mass along the superomedial aspect of the right orbit (arrows in A
and B). The mass is causing pressure remodeling of the right lamina papyracea and ensuing fractional annihilation of the right ethmoidal sinus
(arrow in C). The mass is also causing pressure remodeling of the right orbital roof, extending cranially (arrow in D).

mild nuclear atypia and a low mitotic index. There was
scant cytoplasm and an inconspicuous vasculature. The
tumor cells were seen to infiltrate around the fat cells,
making lacelike patterns. The lesion was positive for CD34
and BCL2 and negative for epithelial membrane antigen
(EMA) and cytokeratin 19. On the basis of the immunohis-
topathology, the tumor was diagnosed as a DFSP.

Postoperative CT (plain and contrast-enhanced) re-
vealed a residual soft tissue mass infiltrating the roof of
the maxillary sinus, right-sided ethmoidal air cells and the
right nasal bone. Posteriorly, the lesion extended to the
superior orbital fissure, causing erosive changes. The infil-
trated soft tissue showed post-contrast enhancement.

Following the diagnosis, the patient was started on
imatinib mesylate therapy (800mg/day). An adjuvant ther-
apy was advised, and the patient subsequently received ra-
diation therapy at a total dose of 60Gy at 1.8Gy to 2.0Gy
per fraction, 5 days per week. The patient’s general condi-
tion was very good at the last follow-up visit, 24 months
after the surgery. No evidence of local relapse was seen,
though there was a residual deformity at the operation
site. No enlargement of cervical and axillary lymph nodes
was present. The patient continues to be symptom-free
with no signs of tumor recurrence.

Discussion
In accordance with the World Health Organization clas-
sification system, DFSP is a locally aggressive mesenchy-
mal tumor that rarely metastasizes, and has intermediate
malignancy [8].

DFSP presents with a specific reciprocal translocation
at t(17;22)(q22;q13) and supernumerary ring chromo-
somes derived from t(17;22), leading to the fusion of genes
collagen type I, alpha 1 (COL1A1), and platelet-derived
growth factor beta-chain [9] (PDGFΒ).

Furthermore, studies have reported cultured cells of
DFSP to be sensitive to treatment with PDGF receptor in-
hibitors, leading to a decreased rate of cell proliferation
[10]. Also, a clinical trial with imatinib showed significant
results in cases of DFSP, thus sustaining the position of
PDGFB signaling in the development of DFSP [11].

However, to the best of our knowledge, our case is the
first of its kind where DFSP was followed by recurrent
leiomyoma. Sanz-Trelles and colleagues reported four
cases of DFSP in Spain with an unusual morphological
change of intraneoplastic blood vessels, where smooth
muscles of the vascular wall underwent focal prolifera-
tion, leading to decreased luminal diameter. It was so
severe in three cases that leiomyomatous nodules and

Bashir et al. Journal of Medical Case Reports  (2015) 9:96 

Page 4 of 5

bundles were formed [12]. Thus, we propose in our case
that the changes in the microvasculature in the right or-
bital cavity due to leiomyoma induced the formation of
DFSP in the same orbit. A more detailed understanding
of the dense factors that regulate the interactions be-
tween tumor and surrounding vascular compartments
will help us analyze if there is any such possibility where
a tumor can induce the development of another neoplas-
tic tissue in its surroundings.

Leiomyomas are characterized as a benign tumor of
the smooth muscle. They can manifest in any part of the
body, such as the uterus, esophagus and small bowel,
and very rarely in the cranial cavity. Uterine leiomyo-
mata are the most prevalent pelvic tumors in women of
reproductive age [13]. It has been reported that estrogen
and progesterone exhibit important roles in the propaga-
tion of uterine leiomyoma [14]. Sozen and Arici elabo-
rated the autocrine and paracrine signaling of the estrogen
and progesterone growth factors at the molecular level,
which provided insight about the mitogenesis in leio-
myoma cells [15]. The growth repression exerted by estro-
gen is associated with the downregulation of PDGF and
mitogen-activated protein kinase in TSC2-expressing cells
[16]. PDGF is conserved by eight cysteine residues. PDGF
receptor isoforms (α-PDGFR and β-PDGFR) activate a
downstream signaling cascade by activating receptor tyro-
sine kinases [17]. It has previously been reported that
PDGFs and their receptors are highly expressed in both
leiomyoma and myometrial smooth muscle tissue [18].

PDGF acts as a mitogen for mesenchymal cells and
plays a pertinent role in the generation of carcinomas
[19]. It has been observed that vascular endothelial growth
factor, basic fibroblast growth factor and PDGF are impli-
cated in the progression of leiomyomas by augmenting
the mitotic activity [20]. The decreased PDGF produc-
tion in leiomyomas after gonadotropin-releasing hor-
mone analogue treatment causes greater depreciation in
uterine volume,
implicating that PDGF might have a
mitogenic action on leiomyomas [21]. The association
of PDGFB gene with the orbital neoplasm has been re-
ported [22]. Thus, we propose that the intracranial leio-
myoma in our patient acted and progressed by the same
mechanism as uterine leiomyomas.

Moreover, it has been reported that eukaryotic genome
forms dynamic physical communication with itself in the
form of chromosome loops and bridges, which can con-
tribute to the silencing of genes regulating DFSP tumor
[23] because the leiomyoma has already enriched the
microenvironment with excessive amounts of PDGF. Be-
cause DFSPs enclose the receptor for PDGF, we propose
that PDGF acts in an autocrine manner to cause cell div-
ision and may lead to the development of DFSP. This
would account for the existence of tumor markers CD34
and CD56 in both DFSPs and vascular leiomyomas.

Surgical excision is the therapeutic choice in patients
with DFSPs [24]. Mohs micrographic surgery is favored
because it preserves cosmesis [25]. However, in case of
residual tissues, radiation therapy is considered effective.
Ballo and colleagues suggested radiation doses of 50Gy
to 60Gy as adjuvant therapy to resection if residual tis-
sue is present and proved DFSP to be a radioresponsive
tumor [24].

Conclusions
The hypothesis that a tumor may induce the formation
of another kind of tumor in the surrounding tissues can-
not be disregarded. The possibility must be evaluated
through controlled trials to seek better treatment strat-
egies to prevent such transformations. One potential
intervention is the effective utilization of PDGF receptor
kinase inhibitors to prevent transformation to any PDGF-
driven tumor, which in our patient was DFSP.

Consent
Written informed consent was obtained from the patient
for publication of this case report and any accompanying
images. A copy of the written consent is available for
review by the Editor-in-Chief of this journal.

Abbreviations
DFSP: Dermatofibrosarcoma protuberans; COL1A1: Collagen, type I, alpha 1
gene; CT: Computed tomography; EMA: Epithelial membrane antigen;
PDGF: Platelet-derived growth factor; PDGFB: Platelet-derived growth
factor beta-chain gene; PDGFR: Platelet-derived growth factor receptor;
SMA: Smooth muscle actin.

Competing interests
The authors declare that they have no competing interests.

Authors’ contributions
SB, MS and HMA carried out the literature search and drafted the
manuscript. ASH, BM, AM and SM participated in study design and helped to
draft the manuscript. All authors read and approved the final manuscript.

Acknowledgments
We are thankful to the departments of ophthalmology and pathology of
Jinnah Postgraduate Medical Center, Karachi for their contributions to this
article.

Author details
1Dow Medical College, Dow University of Health Sciences, Karachi, Pakistan.
2Department of Neurosurgery, Jinnah Postgraduate Medical Center, Karachi,
Pakistan. 3Department of Molecular Diagnostic and Immunology Laboratory,
Sindh Institute of Urology and Transplantation, Aga Khan University, Karachi,
Pakistan.

Received: 12 December 2014 Accepted: 3 March 2015

References
1.

2.

Taylor HB, Helwig EB. Dermatofibrosarcoma protuberans: a study of 115
cases. Cancer. 1962;15:717–25.
Smola MG, Soyer HP, Scharnagl E. Surgical treatment of
dermatofibrosarcoma protuberans: a retrospective study of 20 cases with
review of literature. Eur J Surg Oncol. 1991;17:447–53.

3. McPeak CJ, Cruz T, Nicastri AD. Dermatofibrosarcoma protuberans: an
analysis of 86 cases—five with metastasis. Ann Surg. 1967;166:803–16.

Bashir et al. Journal of Medical Case Reports  (2015) 9:96 

Page 5 of 5

4.

5.

6.

7.

8.

Kransdorf MJ, Meis-Kindblom JM. Dermatofibrosarcoma protuberans:
radiologic appearance. AJR Am J Roentgenol. 1994;163:391–4.
Pack GT, Tabah EJ. Dermatofibrosarcoma protuberans: a report of 39 cases.
AMA Arch Surg. 1951;62:391–41.
Gündüz K, Günalp I, Erden E, Erekul S. Orbital leiomyoma: report of a case
and review of the literature. Surv Ophthalmol. 2004;49:237–42.
Jakobiec FA, Jones IS. Mesenchymal and fibro-osseous tumors. In: Jones IS,
Jakobiec FA, editors. Diseases of the orbit. 2nd ed. Hagerstown, MD:
Harper & Row; 1979. p. 473–7.
Ugurel S. [Dermatofibrosarcoma protuberans]. Hautarzt. 2008;59:933–40.
German.

9. Wang J, Hisaoka M, Shimajiri S, Morimitsu Y, Hashimoto H. Detection of

10.

COL1A1-PDGFB fusion transcripts in dermatofibrosarcoma protuberans by
reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction using archival formalin-fixed,
paraffin-embedded tissues. Diagn Mol Pathol. 1999;8:113–9.
Sjöblom T, Shimizu A, O’Brien KP, Pietras K, Dal Cin P, Buchdunger E, et al.
Growth inhibition of dermatofibrosarcoma protuberans tumors by the
platelet-derived growth factor receptor antagonist STI571 through induction
of apoptosis. Cancer Res. 2001;61:5778–83.

11. Rubin BP, Schuetze SM, Eary JF, Norwood TH, Mirza S, Conrad EU, et al.

Molecular targeting of platelet-derived growth factor B by imatinib mesylate
in a patient with metastatic dermatofibrosarcoma protuberans. J Clin Oncol.
2002;20:3586–91.
Sanz-Trelles A, Ayala-Carbonero A, Rodrigo-Fernández I, Weil-Lara B.
Leiomyomatous nodules and bundles of vascular origin in the
fibrosarcomatous variant of dermatofibrosarcoma protuberans. J Cutan
Pathol. 1998;25:44–9.
Flake GP, Andersen J, Dixon D. Etiology and pathogenesis of uterine
leiomyomas: a review. Environ Health Perspect. 2003;111:1037–54.

12.

13.

14. Ohara N. Selective estrogen receptor modulator and selective progesterone

15.

16.

receptor modulator: Therapeutic efficacy in the treatment of uterine
leiomyoma. Clin Exp Obstet Gynecol. 2005;32:9–11.
Sozen A, Arici A. Interactions of cytokines, growth factors and the
extracellular matrix in the cellular biology of uterine leiomyomata. Fertil
Steril. 2002;78:1–12.
Finlay GA, Hunter DS, Walker CL, Paulson KE, Fanburg BL. Regulation of
PDGF production and ERK activation by estrogen is associated with TSC2
gene expression. Am J Physiol Cell Physiol. 2003;285:C409–18.

17. Heldin CH, Westermark B. Mechanism of action and in vivo role of

platelet-derived growth factor. Physiol Rev. 1999;79:1283–316.
Liang M, Wang H, Zhang Y, Lu S, Wang Z. Expression and functional analysis
of platelet-derived growth factor in uterine leiomyomata. Canc Biol Ther.
2006;5:28–33.

18.

20.

19. Wagner B, Ricono JM, Gorin Y, Block K, Arar M, Riley D, et al. Mitogenic

signaling via platelet-derived growth factor β in metanephric mesenchymal
cells. J Am Soc Nephrol. 2007;18:2903–11.
Lepistö J, Peltonen J, Vähä-Kreula M, Niinikoski J, Laato M. Platelet-derived
growth factor isoforms PDGF-AA, -AB and -BB exert specific effects on
collagen gene expression and mitotic activity of cultured human wound
fibroblasts. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 1995;209:393–9.

21. Martin Chaves EB, Brum IS, Stoll J, Capp E, Corleta HE. Insulin-like growth
factor 1 receptor mRNA expression and autophosphorylation in human
myometrium and leiomyoma. Gynecol Obstet Invest. 2004;57:210–3.
Thierry-Mieg D, Thierry-Mieg J. AceView: a comprehensive cDNA-supported
gene and transcripts annotation. Genome Biol. 2006;7 Suppl 1:S12.

22.

23. Göndör A, Ohlsson R. Chromosome crosstalk in three dimensions. Nature.

2009;461:212–7.

24. Ballo MT, Zagars GK, Pisters P, Pollack A. The role of radiation therapy in the

management of dermatofibrosarcoma protuberans. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol
Phys. 1998;40:823–7.

25. Hobbs ER, Wheeland RG, Bailin PL, Ratz JL, Yetman RJ, Zins JE. Treatment of

dermatofibrosarcoma protuberans with Mohs micrographic surgery. Ann
Surg. 1988;207:102–7.

Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central
and take full advantage of: 

• Convenient online submission

• Thorough peer review

• No space constraints or color ﬁgure charges

• Immediate publication on acceptance

• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar

• Research which is freely available for redistribution

Submit your manuscript at 
www.biomedcentral.com/submit

