Sivakumar et al. Journal of Medical Case Reports  (2015) 9:64 
DOI 10.1186/s13256-015-0549-0

JOURNAL OF MEDICAL
CASE REPORTS

Open Access

CA SE R EP O R T
Pancraniosynostosis following endoscopic-
assisted strip craniectomy for sagittal suture
craniosynostosis in the setting of poor
compliance with follow-up: a case report
Walavan Sivakumar1, Isak Goodwin2, Ross Blagg2, Dana Johns2, Jay Riva-Cambrin1, Faizi Siddiqi2 and Barbu Gociman2*

Abstract

Introduction: There is limited craniofacial literature on the complications of helmet therapy and controversy
regarding the effects of inadequate orthotic helmet therapy. The authors present a case of inadvertently prolonged
orthotic helmet therapy after endoscopic strip craniectomy for isolated sagittal synostosis.
Case presentation: A two-month-old Caucasian baby underwent uncomplicated endoscopic-assisted strip craniectomy
to treat synostosis of the sagittal suture and was fitted for an orthotic helmet two weeks postoperatively. He presented
to the craniofacial clinic eight weeks postoperatively with occipital flattening and increased posterior vault height,
so the helmet was refitted. During the next 18 months, the helmet was used inconsistently without follow-up. Upon
re-presentation, the patient had developed pansynostosis, requiring a subsequent open total cranial vault reconstruction
for correction for this secondary deformity.
Conclusions: Although it remains unclear whether postoperative development of pansynostosis is the result of
prolonged helmeting or the consequence of progressive synostotic disease, this report highlights the importance of
parent education and judicious scheduled follow-up for the avoidance of potential helmet therapy complications.
Keywords: Helmet therapy, Strip craniectomy, Craniosynostosis, Pansynostosis, Plagiocephaly, Minimally invasive,
Sagittal synostosis

Introduction
Orthotic helmet therapy is an accepted treatment of
positional plagiocephaly, as well as of postoperative cra-
nial molding after endoscopic strip craniectomy. While
this is a relatively new technique, early analyses have
shown that endoscopic strip craniectomy followed by
postoperative helmet molding is an effective, safe, and
durable treatment modality [1,2]. Despite the possibility
of air emboli, cerebral parenchymal injuries, significant
cerebrospinal fluid leaks, seizures, and the need for con-
version to an open approach, adverse effects have been
extremely rare [2]. Complications of helmet therapy have
been described, including the development of pressure

sores, local ethanol erythema (related to buildup of clean-
ing fluids at the helmet-skin interface), skin infection, sub-
cutaneous abscess, unsatisfying fit affecting adherence to
therapy, and failed correction of head deformity [3]. Our
report documents postoperative development of pan-
synostosis in a patient who initially presented with an
uncomplicated single-suture sagittal synostosis treated
with endoscopic-assisted strip craniectomy and postopera-
tive molding helmet therapy. We discuss the potential
contributions of poor adherence to helmeting and the nat-
ural progression of synostotic disease in the development
of postoperative pansynostosis.

* Correspondence: barbu.gociman@hsc.utah.edu
2Department of Plastic Surgery, University of Utah Hospital, 30 North 1900
East, Suite 3B400, Salt Lake City, UT 84132, USA
Full list of author information is available at the end of the article

Case presentation
A three-week-old Caucasian male born at term was
found to have an abnormally shaped head and subse-
quently was referred for craniofacial surgical evaluation.

© 2015 Sivakumar et al.; licensee BioMed Central. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and
reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly credited. The Creative Commons Public Domain
Dedication waiver (http://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/) applies to the data made available in this article,
unless otherwise stated.

Sivakumar et al. Journal of Medical Case Reports  (2015) 9:64 

Page 2 of 5

Figure 1 Scaphocephaly from sagittal craniosynostosis. Phenotypic photographs (A, B) and computed tomography imaging (C, D) showing
preoperative scaphocephaly from sagittal craniosynostosis.

The 21-year-old mother’s pregnancy course was un-
complicated; she had routine prenatal care and an un-
complicated vaginal delivery. The physical examination
demonstrated bifrontal bossing, a raised and thickened
sagittal suture, and an elongated anteroposterior diam-
eter skull, consistent with scaphocephaly secondary to
sagittal synostosis (Figure 1A,B). Computed tomography
(CT) imaging of the head confirmed synostosis of the sagit-
tal suture, with the remaining sutures open (Figure 1C,D).
The parents were counseled regarding treatment options.

Both open and endoscopic-assisted surgical techniques
were explained. In the case of the endoscopic procedure,
the need for up to 12 months of postoperative helmet ther-
apy was emphasized. The family opted to proceed with the
endoscopic approach.

At two months of age, our patient underwent an un-
complicated endoscopic-assisted strip craniectomy with
excision of an 11 × 5-cm strip of bone containing the
fused suture,
in accordance with our described tech-
nique [2]. He was fitted for an orthotic helmet two

Figure 2 Pansynostosis and oxycephaly. Computed tomography images (A, B) and preoperative photos (C, D) for secondary corrective
surgery showing pansynostosis and oxycephaly after inconsistent helmet therapy after endoscope-assisted strip craniectomy.

Sivakumar et al. Journal of Medical Case Reports  (2015) 9:64 

Page 3 of 5

weeks postoperatively. The family failed to follow up
with the orthotist, but presented to the craniofacial
clinic eight weeks postoperatively. Our patient was noted
to have occipital flattening and increased height of the
posterior vault. At the time, the flattening was inter-
preted to be secondary to excess occipital helmet pres-
sure, which could have been avoided by adherence to
the routine monthly orthotic adjustments. Our patient
was sent to the orthotist for refitting.

Our patient was lost to follow-up for the next six
months. During this time the same helmet was incon-
sistently used, without follow-up with the craniofacial
surgery team or the orthotist. According to our patient’s
parent, a complicated social situation led to long periods
in which the helmet use was discontinued altogether.
Our patient next presented 18 months postoperatively.
His head circumference was noted to be less than the
first percentile for age, and his head shape was oxy-
cephalic. The fontanelle was small, but patent and flat.

Additionally, our patient was walking unsteadily and was
slightly delayed regarding his language skills. A CT scan
of his head showed pansynostosis (Figure 2). The brain
parenchyma, ventricles, and cisterns were normal in ap-
pearance. Our patient underwent open cranial vault re-
construction (Figure 3A-F).

Postoperatively, our patient progressed well, having a
good secondary result at the one-month follow-up visit
(Figure 4A,B). At the six-month postoperative follow-up
for the open cranial vault reconstruction, his head cir-
cumference had increased to the fifth percentile for age,
and his head shape remained significantly improved
(Figure 4C,D). In addition, no clinical signs or symptoms
of increased intracranial pressure were noted.

Discussion
Pansynostosis has been defined as the fusion of three or
more cranial sutures [4]. Single-photon emission com-
puted tomography (SPECT) studies have shown that

Figure 3 Intraoperative photos of procedure to correct pansynostosis with oxycephaly after prolonged helmet therapy. Preoperative
markings of left lateral and anteroposterior views (A, B); osteotomized skull vertex and barrel stave osteotomies (C, D); completed cranial reconstruction
with temporalis muscle flaps, left lateral and anteroposterior views (E, F).

Sivakumar et al. Journal of Medical Case Reports  (2015) 9:64 

Page 4 of 5

Figure 4 Postoperative photos following open cranial vault reconstruction to repair pancraniosynostosis. Left lateral and anteroposterior
images at one month (A, B) and six months (C, D) after the secondary cranial reconstruction.

craniosynostosis may be associated with decreased cere-
bral blood flow from the brain constriction, precipitated
by premature suture fusion, and can lead to abnormal
brain development. Correction of this synostosis allows
for the normalization of cerebral blood flow and should
be performed within the first eight months of life [5].

Infrequent cases have been described in which pansynos-
tosis developed after cranial vault surgery or endoscopic-
assisted strip craniectomy for craniosynostosis [6]. The
incidence of additional suture synostosis developing post-
operatively has been estimated to be 1 to 1.6% [7]. Post-
operative pansynostosis occurs less frequently, with an
incidence of 0.1% [6,8,9].

Despite the best efforts of the surgeon and craniofacial
team, however, patients can be lost to follow-up, as in
the case presented here. Our standard follow-up for all
patients undergoing strip craniectomy and helmet re-
modeling therapy consists of evaluation immediately
after surgery, and at three, six, nine, and twelve months
after surgery. The follow-up is then continued on a
yearly basis for up to five years. In addition to lack of ad-
herence to the follow-up schedule, this patient used the
postoperatively prescribed orthotic helmet sporadically.
It is possible that the compressive force, albeit intermit-
tent in this case, generated by an unadjusted helmet could
have promoted the premature fusion of the remaining su-
tures. Alternatively, our patient’s subsequent suture fusion
may have been the result of the natural progression of
pansynostosis, independent of helmeting [10].

Conclusions
This case illustrates the postoperative development of
pansynostosis after endoscopic strip craniectomy. It is
unclear whether
this phenomenon is the result of

inconsistent helmeting in the postoperative period or
the effect of progressive nonsyndromic craniosynostotic
disease. It is possible that our patient exhibited a familial
suture synostosis or an atypical form of Crouzon syn-
drome [11]. The answer to this question will require fur-
ther research into postoperative suture physiology in
nonsyndromic craniosynostosis patients and the pa-
thophysiology of pansynostosis. In addition, this report
highlights the pitfalls of performing cranial vault recon-
struction on patients with complex social situations that
may hinder patient care. Close postoperative follow-up
is essential to monitor for signs and symptoms consis-
tent with progressive synostosis and/or raised intracra-
nial pressure.

Consent
Written informed consent was obtained from the pa-
tient’s legal guardian for publication of this case report
and any accompanying images. A copy of the written
consent is available for review by the Editor-in-Chief of
this journal.

Abbreviations
CT: computed tomography; SPECT: single-photon emission computed
tomography.

Competing interests
The authors declare that they have no competing interests.

Authors’ contributions
WS was involved in conception, design and drafting the manuscript. IG was
involved in conception, design, drafting the manuscript and patient
communication. BG was involved in the conception and design of the
manuscript. All authors were involved in critically revising the manuscript.
All authors read and approved the final manuscript.

Authors’ information
Walavan Sivakumar and Isak Goodwin are first co-authors.

Sivakumar et al. Journal of Medical Case Reports  (2015) 9:64 

Page 5 of 5

Acknowledgments
The authors thank Kristin Kraus, M.Sc., for her editorial assistance in the
preparation of this manuscript.

Author details
1Department of Neurosurgery, Primary Children’s Hospital, University of Utah,
100 Mario Capecchi Drive, Salt Lake City, UT 84132, USA. 2Department of
Plastic Surgery, University of Utah Hospital, 30 North 1900 East, Suite 3B400,
Salt Lake City, UT 84132, USA.

Received: 10 November 2014 Accepted: 19 February 2015

References
1.

2.

4.

5.

6.

7.

8.

9.

Jimenez DF, Barone CM, McGee ME. Endoscopy-assisted wide-vertex
craniectomy, barrel stave osteotomies, and postoperative helmet molding
therapy in the management of sagittal suture craniosynostosis. J Neurosurg.
2004;100(5 Suppl Pediatrics):407–17.
Gociman B, Marengo J, Ying J, Kestle JR, Siddiqi F. Minimally invasive strip
craniectomy for sagittal synostosis. J Craniofac Surg. 2012;23:825–8.

3. Wilbrand JF, Wilbrand M, Malik CY, Howaldt HP, Streckbein P, Schaaf H, et al.

Complications in helmet therapy. J Craniomaxillofac Surg. 2012;40:341–6.
Chumas PD, Cinalli G, Arnaud E, Marchac D, Renier D. Classification of
previously unclassified cases of craniosynostosis. J Neurosurg. 1997;86:177–81.
Schaller BJ, Filis A, Merten HA, Buchfelder M. Premature craniosynostosis -
The role of skull base surgery in its correction. A surgical and radiological
experience of 172 operated infants/children. J Craniomaxillofac Surg.
2012;40:195–200.
Jenkins GH, Smith NR, McNeely PD. Pancraniosynostosis following
endoscope-assisted strip craniectomy and helmet orthosis for sagittal
suture craniosynostosis in a nonsyndromic patient. J Neurosurg Pediatr.
2013;12:77–9.
Reddy K, Hoffman H, Armstrong D. Delayed and progressive multiple suture
craniosynostosis. Neurosurgery. 1990;26:442–8.
Hudgins RJ, Cohen SR, Burstein FD, Boydston WR. Multiple suture synostosis
and increased intracranial pressure following repair of single suture,
nonsyndromal craniosynostosis. Cleft Palate Craniofac J. 1998;35:167–72.
Greene Jr CS. Pancraniosynostosis after surgery for single sutural
craniosynostosis. Pediatr Neurosurg. 1998;29:127–32.

10. Blount JP, Louis Jr RG, Tubbs RS, Grant JH. Pansynostosis: a review. Childs

11.

Nerv Syst. 2007;23:1103–9.
Sharma VP, Wall SA, Lord H, Lester T, Wilkie AOM. A typical Crouzon
syndrome with a novel Cys62Arg mutation in FGFR2 presenting with
sagittal synostosis. Cleft Palate Craniofac J. 2012;49:373–7.

Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central
and take full advantage of: 

• Convenient online submission

• Thorough peer review

• No space constraints or color ﬁgure charges

• Immediate publication on acceptance

• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar

• Research which is freely available for redistribution

Submit your manuscript at 
www.biomedcentral.com/submit

