He et al. Journal of Medical Case Reports  (2015) 9:40 
DOI 10.1186/s13256-014-0510-7

JOURNAL OF MEDICAL
CASE REPORTS

CA SE R EP O R T
Open Access
Typical aura without headache: a case report and
review of the literature
Yusheng He*, Yancheng Li and Zhiyu Nie

Abstract

Introduction: Typical aura without headache (TAWH), which has been rarely reported both at home and abroad, is
a rare type of migraine with aura.
Case presentation: This is a report on a 64-year-old Chinese migraineur who has had recurrent typical visual aura
without headache attacks for more than 30 years, and has been misdiagnosed as having had transient ischemic
attacks (TIA) many times. He mainly experienced episodes of ‘homonymous blurred vision’ or photopsia, which
presented as different shapes located at the side or above his visual field, for example, patchy, cord-like, zigzag,
curtain-like or irregular shapes. The shape was inconsistent during each attack, however, the color was mainly gray
or light blue. The visual symptoms gradually disappeared in about 30 minutes. Our patient has never suffered a
headache attack during or after the visual aura. Normal results were observed in his neurological and eye
examinations, complete blood test, electroencephalogram and neuroimaging examination.
Conclusions: TAWH is an uncommon phenomenon of migraine. Migraine with visual aura mainly presents positive
and dynamic symptoms. It has a benign course and can be diagnosed after exclusion of other organic diseases
such as TIA and epilepsy.
Keywords: Typical aura without headache, Migraine with aura, Transient ischemic attack

Introduction
According to the definition of the International Headache
Society (IHS), migraine aura is the reversible focal neuro-
logical symptoms that arise before or during the onset of
migraine headache. The symptoms usually develop grad-
ually over 5 to 20 minutes and last for less than 60 minutes
[1]. About 15 to 20% migraineurs have aura symptoms,
but visual symptoms occur in more than 90% of migraine
auras. The most common visual symptoms in an aura with
or without a headache are photopsia and teichopsia. Other
visual symptoms include scotoma, visual distortion, sense
of heat wave, blurring and hemianopsia. Other concomi-
tant neurological symptoms may also occur. Typical aura
without headache (TAWH) is a rare type of migraine with
aura, the incidence of migraine is 3% in women and about
1% in men, respectively [2]. As far as we know, there were
few detailed case reports on TAWH in adults.

Below, we report the case of a patient with TAWH. This
diagnosis was in accordance with the third International

* Correspondence: drheys@gmail.com
Department of Neurology, Affiliated Tongji Hospital of Tongji University, 389
XinCun Road, Shanghai 200065, China

Classification of Headache Disorders beta version (the
ICHD-3 beta). The diagnostic criteria of TAWH in ICHD-
3 beta includes [3]:

1. At least two attacks fulfilling criteria 2 and 3
2. One or more of the following fully reversible aura

symptoms: visual, sensory or speech/language
symptoms but no motor, brainstem or retinal
symptoms

3. At least two of the following four characteristics

a. At least one aura symptom spreads gradually over

at least 5 minutes, and/or, two or more
symptoms occur in succession

b. Each individual aura symptom lasts 5 to 60

minutes

c. At least one aura symptom is one-sided
d. The aura is accompanied or followed by

headache. A possible lag phase lasts maximally 60
minutes

4. Not accounted for by another ICHD-3 beta diagnosis,

and transient ischemic attack has been excluded.

© 2015 He et al.; licensee BioMed Central. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and
reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly credited. The Creative Commons Public Domain
Dedication waiver (http://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/) applies to the data made available in this article,
unless otherwise stated.

He et al. Journal of Medical Case Reports  (2015) 9:40 

Page 2 of 5

5. No headache accompanies or follows the aura

within 60 minutes.

Case presentation
Our patient is a 64-year-old Chinese man who works in
a department of radiology. Our patient, who has been
misdiagnosed as having transient
ischemic attacks
(TIAs) for many years, was admitted to the Tongji Hos-
pital of Shanghai Tongji University reporting paroxys-
mal homonymous blurred vision for more than 30
years. He experienced the first paroxysmal homonym-
ous vision anomaly with no obvious cause when he was
about 30 years old, he felt ‘curtain-like’ fuzziness on the
sides of his visual fields (Figure 1). Afterward, the visual
symptoms occurred once to twice every year, and pre-
sented different shapes located on the side or above his
visual field, for example patchy, cord-like, zigzag, curtain-
like or irregular shapes. The shapes were inconsistent dur-
ing each attack (Figure 2). The symptoms occurred three
times in the week before our examination and the last at-
tack was described as ‘many bright, small, block diagrams
above the center of the visual field’, similar to a local ‘mo-
saic’ (Figure 3), accompanied by paroxysmal position ver-
tigo. The color of the visual onset was mainly gray or light
blue. During each attack, the visual symptoms gradually
disappeared in about 30 minutes, and were not accom-
panied by headache attack, nausea, photophobia or
phonophobia, amaurosis, diplopia,
limb weakness or
speech disorder.

Our patient did not have a medical history of hyper-
tension, diabetes, cardiovascular disease, stroke, head-
ache and family genetic diseases. He never drank but has
smoked about 20 cigarettes daily for 40 years.

Our patient’s test result from a neurological examin-

ation was normal.

An eye examination of his vision and visual field was
normal. A three-dimensional optic coherence tomog-
raphy scan showing the thicknesses of the macula, optic
disk and retinal nerve fiber layer (RNFL) was normal.

His routine laboratory tests (a full blood count, erythro-
cyte sedimentation rate, platelets, creatinine, blood urea
nitrogen, glucose, lipids, and transaminases) were normal,
his thyroid hormone values and anti-thyroid peroxidase
(TPO) antibody level, anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic anti-
bodies (ANCA), cellular and humoral
immune indexes
were normal, and his HIV and syphilis serological test re-
sults were negative.

A chest X-ray, electroencephalogram (EEG), echocar-
diogram and visual evoked potential examination results
were normal. A carotid Doppler ultrasound indicated no
carotid plaque and his common carotid artery (CCA)
intima-media thickness (IMT) was 0.7mm.

Brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), brain CT
angiography (CTA) and neck magnetic resonance angi-
ography (MRA) examinations displayed normal results.

After admission, our patient took flunarizine, 5mg per
day, and had no similar visual symptoms in the six-
month follow-up period.

Discussion
Migraine aura without headache, which is now the ac-
cepted term for ‘migraine equivalents’ or ‘acephalgic mi-
graine’, episodic symptoms believed to be migrainous auras
but not followed by a headache [4], is a rare headache
phenomenon. The incidence of these phenomena of mi-
graine in migraine patients is 3% in women and about 1%
in men, respectively. It can happen in individuals at any age
and individuals without previous migraine attack. However,
the incidence is higher in older people, especially in those
who experienced migraine aura when they were young.
Aiba found that the age of patients with TAWH showed a
biphasic distribution (20 to 39 years and 60 to 69 years) [5].
These individuals may develop migraine aura, however,
with no concomitant headache. In searching current litera-
ture, there were few case reports on recurrent visual aura
without headache attack that lasted over 30 years.

Our patient did not have the common risk factors of
cerebrovascular disease, presented paroxysmal positive

Figure 1 Our patient felt a ‘curtain-like’ fuzziness on the side of his visual fields when he was 30 years old (drawn by the patient).

He et al. Journal of Medical Case Reports  (2015) 9:40 

Page 3 of 5

Figure 2 The shapes located on the side or above his visual field were inconsistent during each attack, the color of visual onset was
light blue (drawn by the patient).

and dynamic visual symptoms and normal eye examin-
ation, neuroimaging and EEG results. Our patient had
experienced a medical education, so he could talk about
his case history in detail and objectively describe the vis-
ual attack graphs. TAWH can be diagnosed after exclu-
sion of TIA, epilepsy and inflammatory cerebrovascular
disease.

About 15 to 20% of migraineurs have experienced aura
symptoms, with visual aura being the most common,

which may be accompanied by other neurological symp-
toms such as: dizziness, numbness, memory decline and
aphasia [6]. The most common visual symptoms of aura
migraine are positive symptoms such as flash hallucina-
tions, flash scotoma, visual distortion and sense of heat
wave. Negative symptoms may also occur, such as dark
spots, blurred vision and homonymous hemianopsia.
Typical visual auras are usually colorful, bright, shim-
mering and dynamic, and may form geometric shapes

Figure 3 The patient described ‘many bright, small, block diagrams above the center of the visual field’, similar to a local ‘mosaic’
(drawn by the patient).

He et al. Journal of Medical Case Reports  (2015) 9:40 

Page 4 of 5

with jagged rims [4]. The patient described in this report
had mainly developed positive symptoms, with different
visual outcomes and irregular shapes during each attack
above or on the side of his visual field. He also devel-
oped homonymous blurred vision, however, with obvi-
ous shapes and color change, which was different from
homonymous hemianopia.

The pathophysiology of migraine has led to a transi-
tion from a purely vascular hypothesis to a neurovascu-
lar hypothesis, and now to a central nervous system
theory (centralized sensitization). The pathogenesis of
aura is still poorly understood. The mechanisms of the
presence of aura and absence of headache during a mi-
graine attack are not known and it is possible they are
not the same. Cortical spreading depression (CSD) has
long been considered the physiologic substrate of mi-
graine visual aura. CSD is a wave of neuronal and glial
depolarization, followed by long-lasting suppression of
neural activity. Neuroimaging research supports that
CSD is the initial pathophysiological change, which may
be related to the decrease in the cortical excitability pro-
cessing ability of the excitatory amino acid neurotrans-
mitter glutamic acid in the occipital cortex [7]. During
CSD there is an initial neuronal depolarization, followed
by hyperpolarization and relative neuronal silence that
spreads contiguously from the occipital
lobe forward
[8-12]. This spreading wave of neuronal depression
travels slowly, at 3 to 5mm per minute, which coincides
with the progressive visual symptoms of typical migraine
aura [12], but the spreading time is not more than 60
minutes. Of course, other neurological symptoms may
occur if CSD is beyond the occipital cortex.

It is uncommon that migraine patients show recurrent
transient neurologic symptoms only. Migraine aura has
a benign course. Other organic diseases, especially TIA
and epilepsy, must be excluded before diagnosis of mi-
graine aura [4]. Because there are no specific results of
accessory examinations in migraine, careful inquiry into
medical history is the most important approach to dis-
tinguish the differences among TIA, epilepsy and mi-
graine aura, which can save time in the diagnosis.
Although the patient described in this report is a med-
ical worker, initially he simply described the visual aura
as ‘blurred vision’, so he had been misdiagnosed with
TIA for many years. If we had not asked about the de-
tailed symptoms during each attack, our patient would
possibly have been misdiagnosed with TIA again.

The main differences between TAWH and TIA are:
(1) medical history: a patient with the former may have
experienced migraine attacks when he was young; a pa-
tient with the latter usually has risk factors of cerebro-
vascular disease, such as hypertension, diabetes and a
positive family history. (2) Visual symptoms: the visual
aura of the former is caused by CSD, therefore, the

visual change is not static but instead dynamic. Typical
visual aura is usually colorful, bright and shimmering,
and can form geometric shapes. Even though dark spots
might be observed, the edge is, however, bright and
shimmering. Patients with TIA mainly show homonym-
ous hemianopia with a relatively consistent format. (3)
Duration: the former usually lasts about 15 to 30 mi-
nutes, and for less than 60 minutes. However there is a
case report of negative visual symptoms (dimmed vision
on the right field) without headache that lasted more
than 6 months [13]; the latter usually lasts 5 to 10 mi-
nutes. (4) Neuroimaging (CTA or MRI): the former is
usually normal; the latter usually has evidence of ische-
mic cerebrovascular disease. (5) Cerebrovascular evalu-
ation: the former is usually normal; the latter usually
shows evidence of carotid artery atherosclerosis or intra-
cranial artery stenosis.

Nonconvulsive epilepsy with visual symptoms and
TAWH are both uncommon clinical phenomenons. Cli-
nicians should pay attention to identify these rare events,
especially because typical visual aura in young people
may be easily misdiagnosed as epilepsy. The visual colors
of both diseases are bright and shimmering, which are
different from TIA. However, the attack pattern of epi-
lepsy is often rigid with a singular visual phenotype, and
an epilepsy wave can be observed via EEG examination.

Conclusions
Physicians should pay attention to TAWH even though it
is an uncommon phenomenon of migraine. Migraine with
visual aura mainly presents positive and dynamic symp-
toms. It is a benign course and can be diagnosed after ex-
clusion of other organic diseases such as TIA and epilepsy.

Consent
Written informed consent was obtained from the patient
for publication of this case report and any accompanying
images. A copy of the written consent is available for re-
view by the Editor-in-Chief of this journal.

Abbreviations
ANCA: anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies; CCA: common carotid artery;
CSD: cortical spreading depression; CTA: computed tomography angiography;
EEG: electroencephalogram; IHS: International Headache Society; IMT: intima-media
thickness; MRA: magnetic resonance angiography; MRI: magnetic resonance
imaging; RNFL: retinal nerve fiber layer; TAWH: typical aura without headache;
TIA: transient ischemic attack; TPO: thyroid peroxidase.

Competing interests
The authors declare that they have no competing interests.

Authors’ contributions
YH carried out the research project (conception, organisation and execution)
and wrote the first draft. YL carried out the research project (execution and
acquisition of data) and reviewed and critiqued this report. ZN carried out
the research project (execution and acquisition of data) and reviewed and
critiqued this report. All authors read and approved the final manuscript.

He et al. Journal of Medical Case Reports  (2015) 9:40 

Page 5 of 5

Acknowledgements
We would like to thank Dr. Lili Zhou for editing this manuscript.

Received: 18 September 2014 Accepted: 29 December 2014

References
1.

Olesen J. The international classification of headache disorders. Headache.
2008;48:691–3.
Russell MB, Rasmussen BK, Thorvaldsen P, Olesen J. Prevalence and sex-ratio
of the subtypes of migraine. Int J Epidemiol. 1995;24:612–8.
Headache Classification Committee of the International Headache Society.
The international classification of headache disorders, 3rd edition (beta
version). Cephalalgia. 2013;33:629.
Kunkel RS. Migraine aura without headache: benign, but a diagnosis of
exclusion. Cleve Clin J Med. 2005;72:529–34.
Aiba S, Tatsumoto M, Saisu A, Iwanami H, Chiba K, Senoo T, et al.
Prevalence of typical migraine aura without headache in Japanese
ophthalmology clinics. Cephalalgia. 2010;30:962–7.
Petrusic I, Zidverc-Trajkovic J, Podgorac A, Sternic N. Underestimated
phenomena: higher cortical dysfunctions during migraine aura. Cephalalgia.
2013;33:861–7.
Siniatchkin M, Sendacki M, Moeller F, Wolff S, Jansen O, Siebner H, et al.
Abnormal changes of synaptic excitability in migraine with aura. Cereb
Cortex. 2012;22:2207–16.
Cohen AS, Goadsby PJ. Functional neuroimaging of primary headache
disorders. Curr Neurol Neurosci Rep. 2004;4:105–10.
Goadsby PJ. Emerging therapies for migraine. Nat Clin Pract Neurol.
2007;3:610–19.

2.

3.

4.

5.

6.

7.

8.

9.

10. Rogawski MA. Common pathophysiologic mechanisms in migraine and

epilepsy. Arch Neurol. 2008;65:709–14.

11. Durham PL, Garrett FG. Neurological mechanisms of migraine: potential of

the gap-junction modulator tonabersat in prevention of migraine.
Cephalalgia. 2009;2:1–6.
Schwedt TJ, Schwedt DW. Advanced neuroimaging of migraine. Lancet
Neurol. 2009;8:560–8.
Lim J, Jo KD, Lee MK, Jang W. Persistent negative visual aura in migraine
without headache: a case report. J Med Case Rep. 2014;8:61.

12.

13.

Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central
and take full advantage of: 

• Convenient online submission

• Thorough peer review

• No space constraints or color ﬁgure charges

• Immediate publication on acceptance

• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar

• Research which is freely available for redistribution

Submit your manuscript at 
www.biomedcentral.com/submit

