Chen et al. Journal of Medical Case Reports  (2015) 9:58 
DOI 10.1186/s13256-015-0542-7

JOURNAL OF MEDICAL
CASE REPORTS

Open Access

CA SE R EP O R T
Parvovirus B19 infection presenting with severe
erythroid aplastic crisis during pregnancy in a
woman with autoimmune hemolytic anemia and
alpha-thalassemia trait: a case report
Chi-Ching Chen1, Chin-Shan Chen2, Wei-Yao Wang3, Jui-Shan Ma4, Hwei-Fan Shu5 and Frank S Fan6*

Abstract

Introduction: Parvovirus B19 virus commonly causes subclinical infection, but it can prove fatal to the fetus during
pregnancy and cause severe anemia in an adult with hemolytic diseases. We present the case of a woman with
autoimmune hemolytic anemia who was diagnosed with parvovirus B19-induced transient aplastic crisis during her
second trimester of pregnancy and faced the high risk of both fetal and maternal complications related to this
specific viral infection. To the best of our knowledge, the experience of successful intravenous immunoglobulin
treatment for B19 virus infection during pregnancy, as in our case, is limited.
Case presentation: A 28-year-old and 20-week pregnant Chinese woman with genetically confirmed alpha-
thalassemia trait was diagnosed with cold antibody autoimmune hemolytic anemia and suffered from transient
aplastic crisis caused by B19 virus infection. She received intravenous immunoglobulin treatment to reduce the risk
of hydrops fetalis. Her peripheral blood reticulocyte percentage recovered, but anemia persisted, so she underwent
several courses of high dose intravenous dexamethasone for controlling her underlying hemolytic problem. Finally,
her hemoglobin levels remained stable with no need of erythrocyte transfusion, and a healthy baby boy was
naturally delivered.
Conclusions: Parvovirus B19 virus infection should be considered when a sudden exacerbation of anemia occurs in a
patient with hemolytic disease, and the possible fetal complications caused by maternal B19 virus infection during
pregnancy should not be ignored. Close monitoring and adequate management can keep both mother and fetus safe.
Keywords: Parvovirus B19, Pregnancy, Autoimmune hemolytic anemia, Transient aplastic crisis, Intravenous
immunoglobulin

Introduction
Most parvovirus B19 virus (B19 virus for short in this re-
port) infection causes asymptomatic or only mild illness,
such as erythema infectiosum, polyarthropathy syndrome
or transient reticulocytopenia in healthy adults or children,
but can sometimes be responsible for life-threatening
diseases. The cytopathic effect of B19 virus in patients with
rapid erythrocytes production results in profuse extinc-
tion of proerythroblasts. Failure of differentiation from

proerythroblast
into later stage erythroid precursors
leads to transient aplastic crisis (TAC) [1]. When B19
virus infection occurs during pregnancy, transplacental
transmission of B19 virus to the fetus can induce
hydrops fetalis or fetal loss due to severe anemia and
cardiac failure [2]. Here we report a rare case of severe
anemic crisis due to B19 virus infection in a 20-week
pregnant woman with alpha-thalassemia trait and pos-
sible pregnancy-related cold agglutinin hemolysis.

* Correspondence: fantast.fan@msa.hinet.net
6Division of Hematology/Oncology, Department of Internal Medicine, Feng
Yuan Hospital, No. 100, Ankang Road, Fengyuan District, Taichung City 420,
Taiwan
Full list of author information is available at the end of the article

Case presentation
This 28-year-old and 20-week pregnant Chinese woman
with genetically confirmed alpha-thalassemia trait and a

© 2015 Chen et al.; licensee BioMed Central. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and
reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly credited. The Creative Commons Public Domain
Dedication waiver (http://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/) applies to the data made available in this article,
unless otherwise stated.

Chen et al. Journal of Medical Case Reports  (2015) 9:58 

Page 2 of 5

current obstetric record of gravida 3, para 0, artificial abor-
tion 1 and ectopic pregnancy 1 (G3P0AA1E1 by Gravida/
para/abortus (GPA) system) presented to our emergency
unit (EU) due to headache, chills, fever and general soreness
for one day. At our EU, her physical examination revealed a
fever up to 38.5°C, mild tachypnea with a respiratory rate up
to 21 breaths/min and bilateral lower back knocking pain.
Her obstetric ultrasound revealed 20 weeks gestational age,
normal placenta location and a fetal heart beat between 140
and 150/min. No vaginal bleeding was noted.

Her laboratory data showed pyuria (urine white blood
cell count 30 to 50/high power field) and severe periph-
eral blood pancytopenia: white blood cell (WBC) count
2200/mm3 with an absolute neutrophil count (ANC) of
1780/mm3, hemoglobin 5.5g/dL, mean corpuscular vol-
ume (MCV) 119.4fl and platelet count 116,000/mm3.
Aggregation of erythrocytes (Figure 1) and low reticulo-
cyte percentage (0.1%) were detected in peripheral blood
smear. Both direct and indirect antiglobulin tests were
strongly positive for antibodies against erythrocytes. The
autoantibody was found to be of the cold type. A subse-
quent laboratory investigation revealed 1:32(+) of cold
hemagglutinin titer, raised lactate dehydrogenase (314U/L)
and low levels of complement 3 (55.5mg/dL) and comple-
ment 4 (10mg/dL).

Her initial bone marrow cytology showed myeloid hyper-
plasia and only very few erythroid precursors with erythro-
blasts in abnormal megaloblastic change (Figure 2), some of
which presented with pseudopods or ‘dog ears’ (Figure 3),
and almost no erythroid maturation beyond basophilic nor-
moblasts. Her bone marrow biopsy revealed scattered eryth-
roblasts displaying homogeneous ground glass intranuclear
viral inclusions (Figure 4) and positive nuclear immuno-
staining of B19 virus (Figure 5). Polymerase chain reaction
for B19 virus DNA was positive in specimens from her bone

Figure 2 Cytology of bone marrow. The yellow arrow indicates a
giant pronormoblast in the bone marrow.

marrow, plasma and nasal cavity. Antibodies against
Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) were not checked because she did
not present with the symptoms and signs of infectious
mononucleosis or lymphoproliferative disorders present in
most reported cases of EBV-associated hemolytic anemia.

TAC caused by B19 virus infection in a pregnant woman
with cold antibody autoimmune hemolytic anemia (AIHA)
was diagnosed. She received intravenous immunoglobulin
(IVIG) injection (CSL Limited, Parkville, Australia), 0.4gm/
Kg/day for five days, for eradication of viremia and prophy-
laxis of occurrence of hydrops fetalis. Although her periph-
eral blood reticulocyte percentage increased dramatically
after IVIG treatment (Figure 6), her hemolytic anemia did
not improve much. In order to control her autoimmune
hemolysis,
intravenous high dose dexamethasone (Astar
Chem. & Pharm., Hsinchu, Taiwan), 40mg/day for four days,
was prescribed. This treatment was repeated every two

Figure 1 Peripheral blood smear. Aggregation of erythrocytes was
noted in the peripheral blood smear just before dexamethasone
treatment.

Figure 3 Cytology of bone marrow. The yellow arrow indicates a
giant pronormoblast with ‘dog ear’ cytoplasmic projections in the
bone marrow.

Chen et al. Journal of Medical Case Reports  (2015) 9:58 

Page 3 of 5

Figure 4 Bone marrow core biopsy. Parvovirus B19 intranuclear
viral inclusions (clear area) leading to chromatin marginalization to
the vicinity of the nuclear membrane within two pronormoblasts
indicated by the yellow arrows.

weeks for four cycles and then shifted to a monthly oral
schedule. She was discharged in a stable condition after the
fourth intravenous treatment and received careful follow-up
study in our outpatient clinic. No more erythrocytes were
transfused after the fifth course of high dose dexamethasone
(Figure 7) in spite of persistent mild anemia. During her
hospitalization and subsequent outpatient clinic visits, ob-
stetric ultrasound did not reveal any evidence of
fetal
anemia and hydrops fetalis. Four months later, a normal
looking healthy baby boy (Apgar score 8 at one minute and
9 at five minutes, body weight 3240gm) was naturally deliv-
ered with vacuum extraction aid. After delivery of the baby,
her AIHA quickly resolved.

Figure 6 Rapid response of intravenous human
immunoglobulin treatment. Effects of intravenous human
immunoglobulin (IVIG) on reticulocytes percentage in peripheral
blood during treatment course. The blue arrow stands for day one
of IVIG 0.4gm/kg/day for five constitutive days.

Discussion
Whether our patient’s B19 virus in her second trimester
pregnancy was a new infection or a reactivation of a persist-
ing previous infection cannot be surely answered, since the
persistence of infection in the bone marrow has been re-
ported in immunocompetent individuals several years after
primary infection [3]. B19 virus infection causes a five to 10-
day cessation of erythrocytic production, but the life span of
normal erythrocytes is about 120 days, so B19 virus infec-
tion usually is asymptomatic or mildly symptomatic with
self-limited anemia in people without hemolytic diseases [4].
In patients with expanding erythrocyte production caused

Figure 5 Immunohistochemical staining of bone marrow core
biopsy. Immunohistochemical staining for parvovirus B19 using
monoclonal antibody NCL-PARVO (NovocastraTM, Leica Microsystems,
Newcastle upon Tyne, United Kingdom) specific for viral antigens
VP1 and VP2 in bone marrow core biopsy specimen.

Figure 7 Hemoglobin correction and dexamethasone treatment.
Effects of pulse high dose dexamethasone treatment on hemoglobin
level. The green triangles stand for day one of dexamethasone 40mg/
day for four constitutive days. The red squares stand for erythrocytes
transfusion.

Chen et al. Journal of Medical Case Reports  (2015) 9:58 

Page 4 of 5

by the shortened life span of erythrocytes due to an under-
lying hemolytic problem, such as spherocytosis, sickle cell
anemia, autoimmune hemolytic anemia, thalassemia and
glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase deficiency, B19 virus
infection could induce TAC with severe anemia [2,5].
Thrombocytopenia and neutropenia have also been reported
in patients during or after B19 virus infection [2,4,6].

Most patients with TAC had a good prognosis after
erythrocyte transfusion and adequate monitoring until
their bone marrow recovered, while IVIG is recom-
mended for patients at risk of severe complications or
with immunodeficiency [2,4,5]. Rapid efficacious reticu-
locyte recovery and hemoglobin correction after only
one IVIG course has also been reported with only a few
side effects [7]. Maternally administrated IVIG therapy
during pregnancy for improving maternal and fetal out-
come in severe B19 virus-induced disorders has also
been reported in two cases without obvious complica-
tions [8,9]. Weekly fetal ultrasound examination includ-
ing estimation of middle cerebral artery peak systolic
velocity (MCA-PSV) for timely detection of possible
fetal anemia and hydrops fetalis during a post-exposure
period of 12 to 20 weeks was highly recommended [10].
In our patient, a 20-week pregnant woman with alpha-
thalassemia trait and autoimmune hemolytic anemia,
B19 virus infection not only caused TAC in the mother,
but could also have led to severe anemia, hydrops and
even death of the fetus, as cautioned by experts when
maternal infection occurred between 17 and 24 weeks of
gestation [11]. Therefore we arranged immediate IVIG
treatment in addition to erythrocyte transfusion. Our pa-
tient responded well to IVIG treatment since her reticu-
locyte dramatically recovered. However, her anemia due
to cold agglutinin disease persisted. So far, only cortico-
steroids and rituximab (both in pregnancy risk class C)
were considered eligible for treating cold agglutinin dis-
ease during the third trimester of pregnancy.

Although corticosteroid treatment in the first trimester is
well-known to increase the risk of fetal orofacial clefts, and
the safety of mother and fetus receiving corticosteroids for
treating idiopathic thrombocytopenic purpura in the third
trimester of pregnancy, even with high dose intravenous
methylprednisolone, was previously confirmed [12], the ex-
perience of corticosteroid pulse therapy in the second tri-
mester was limited to the best of our knowledge. However,
long term inhibition of neonatal B-lymphocyte development
caused by maternal administration of rituximab in the third
trimester of pregnancy has been reported [13]. Even though
the immune impairment was reversible and no infection-
related complications took place according to the literature,
our patient refused rituximab injection for fear of damage to
the baby. In spite of the generally poor effect of corticoster-
oid therapy in treating cold antibody AIHA [14], our high
dose dexamethasone policy starting in our patient’s second

trimester of pregnancy controlled her cold agglutinin disease
satisfactorily, without notable side effects,
in both the
mother and her baby.

Conclusions
B19 virus infection in a pregnant woman with increased
erythropoietic demand from alpha-thalassemia trait and cold
AIHA resulted in a TAC in the mother and put the fetus at
risk of development of hydrops fetalis. Prompt IVIG injec-
tion eradicated the virus rapidly, resolved TAC in the
mother and prevented further dangerous fetal
infection.
Supportive erythrocytes transfusion and intensive high dose
dexamethasone treatment maintained hemoglobin at stable
levels. Safe delivery of a healthy baby was happily achieved.

Patient perspective
Both my husband and I felt satisfactorily about the rapid
recovery of my hematopoietic function and the safe deliv-
ery of a healthy baby boy. We would like to express our
great appreciation to our doctors for their efficient and
correct diagnosis and prompt management. Although the
rather expensive intravenous immunoglobulin was not re-
imbursed for transient aplastic crisis according to the gen-
eral health insurance policy in our country and we had to
pay for it by ourselves, we thought it was worthwhile since
nothing was more important than our health.

Consent
Written informed consent was obtained from the patient
for publication of this case report and accompanying im-
ages. A copy of the written consent is available for review
by the Editor-in-Chief of this journal.

Abbreviations
AIHA: Autoimmune hemolytic anemia; ANC: Absolute neutrophil count;
EBV: Epstein-Barr virus; EU: Emergency unit; GAP: Gravida/para/abortus;
IVIG: Intravenous immunoglobulin; MCA-PSV: Middle cerebral artery peak
systolic velocity; MCV: Mean corpuscular volume; TAC: Transient aplastic crisis;
WBC: White blood cell.

Competing interests
The authors declare that they have no competing interests.

Authors’ contributions
CSC was the chief care giver and provided our patient’s obstetric
examination data. WYW arranged polymerase chain reaction test for viral
DNA. JSM instructed intravenous immunoglobulin therapy and took care of
the newborn baby. HFS performed the histological examination of bone
marrow biopsy. FSF reviewed the bone marrow smear, and analyzed and
interpreted the patient data regarding the hematological disease. CCC did
the literature review. CCC and FSF were major contributors in writing the
manuscript. All authors read and approved the final manuscript.

Authors’ information
FS Fan is a qualified hematologist and oncologist in Taiwan. Dr Fan is an
associated professor of internal medicine in National Yang Ming Medical
University, Taipei, Taiwan, and the chief of both the Division of Hematology/
Oncology and Department of Internal Medicine of Ministry of Health and
Welfare Feng Yuan Hospital, Taichung, Taiwan, Republic of China.

Chen et al. Journal of Medical Case Reports  (2015) 9:58 

Page 5 of 5

Acknowledgements
We thank our patient who provides us the opportunity to report this rare
and valuable medical experience.

Author details
1Department of Internal Medicine, Feng Yuan Hospital, No. 100, Ankang
Road, Fengyuan District, Taichung City 420, Taiwan. 2Department of
Gynecology and Obstetrics, Feng Yuan Hospital, No. 100, Ankang Road,
Fengyuan District, Taichung City 420, Taiwan. 3Section of Infectious Disease,
Department of Internal Medicine, Feng Yuan Hospital, No. 100, Ankang Road,
Fengyuan District, Taichung City 420, Taiwan. 4Department of Pediatrics,
Feng Yuan Hospital, No. 100, Ankang Road, Fengyuan District, Taichung City
420, Taiwan. 5Department of Anatomical Pathology, Feng Yuan Hospital, No.
100, Ankang Road, Fengyuan District, Taichung City 420, Taiwan. 6Division of
Hematology/Oncology, Department of Internal Medicine, Feng Yuan
Hospital, No. 100, Ankang Road, Fengyuan District, Taichung City 420,
Taiwan.

Received: 30 June 2014 Accepted: 12 February 2015

References
1.
2.

Young NS, Brown KE. Parvovirus B19. N Engl J Med. 2004;354:586–97.
Broliden K, Tolfvenstam T, Norbeck O. Clinical aspects of parvovirus B19
infection. J Intern Med. 2006;260:285–304.
Servant-Delmas A, Lefrère JJ, Morinet F, Pillet S. Advances in human B19
erythrovirus biology. J Virol. 2010;84:9658–65.
Heegaard ED, Brown KE. Human parvovirus B19. Clin Microbiol Rev.
2002;15:485–505.
Servey JT, Reamy BV, Hodge J. Clinical presentations of parvovirus B19
infection. Am Fam Physician. 2007;75:373–6.
Brown KE, Young NS. Parvoviruses and bone marrow failure. Stem Cells.
1996;14:151–63.
Crabol Y, Terrier B, Rozenberg F, Pestre V, Legendre C, Hermine O, et al.
Intravenous immunoglobulin therapy for pure red cell aplasia related to
human parvovirus B19 infection: a retrospective study of 10 patients and
review of the literature. Clin Infect Dis. 2013;56:968–77.
Selbing A, Josefsson A, Dahle L, Lindgren R. Parvovirus B19 infection during
pregnancy treated with high-dose intravenous gammaglobulin.
Lancet. 1995;345:660–1.

3.

4.

5.

6.

7.

8.

9. Mant MJ. Chronic idiopathic pure red cell aplasia: successful treatment

during pregnancy and durable response to intravenous immunoglobulin.
J Intern Med. 1994;236:593–5.

10. Dijkmans AC, de Jong EP, Dijkmans BA, Lopriore E, Vossen A, Walther FJ,

et al. Parvovirus B19 in pregnancy: prenatal diagnosis and management of
fetal complications. Curr Opin Obstet Gynecol. 2012;24:95–101.
Lamont RF, Sobel JD, Vaisbuch E, Kusanovic JP, Mazaki‐Tovi S, Kim SK, et al.
Parvovirus B19 infection in human pregnancy. BJOG. 2011;118:175–86.

11.

12. British Committee for Standards in Haematology General Haematology Task

Force. Guidelines for the investigation and management of idiopathic
thrombocytopenic purpura in adults, children and in pregnancy.
Br J Haematol. 2003;120:574–96.
Klink DT, Van Elburg RM, Schreurs MWJ, Van Well GTJ. Rituximab
administration in third trimester of pregnancy suppresses neonatal B-cell
development. Clin Dev Immunol. 2008;2008:271363.

13.

14. Petz LD. Cold antibody autoimmune hemolytic anemias. Blood Rev.

2008;22:1–15.

Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central
and take full advantage of: 

• Convenient online submission

• Thorough peer review

• No space constraints or color ﬁgure charges

• Immediate publication on acceptance

• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar

• Research which is freely available for redistribution

Submit your manuscript at 
www.biomedcentral.com/submit

