De Langhe et al. Journal of Medical Case Reports  (2015) 9:82 
DOI 10.1186/s13256-015-0571-2

CA SE R EP O R T

JOURNAL OF MEDICAL
CASE REPORTS

Open Access

Mechanic’s hands in a woman with
undifferentiated connective tissue disease
and interstitial lung disease – anti-PL7 positive
antisynthetase syndrome: a case report
Ellen De Langhe1*, Jan Lenaerts1, Xavier Bossuyt2, Rene Westhovens1 and Wim A Wuyts3

Abstract

Introduction: Interstitial lung disease can be idiopathic or occur in the setting of connective tissue diseases. In the
latter case it requires a different treatment approach with a better prognosis. Interstitial lung disease can precede
the onset of typical connective tissue disease features by many years, and therefore meticulous multidisciplinary
follow-up is crucial. This case highlights the diagnostic challenge and the need for intensified attention for subtle
clinical features when faced with interstitial lung disease in patients with characteristics of a hitherto
undifferentiated connective tissue disease.
Case presentation: A 44-year-old Caucasian woman presented to our pulmonology department with dyspnea,
Raynaud’s phenomenon and subtle swelling of fingers and eyelids. Laboratory analysis and autoantibody screening
was negative. She was diagnosed with nonspecific interstitial pneumonia with a concurring undifferentiated
connective tissue disease. After four years of stable disease, she presented with rapid pulmonary deterioration,
myalgia, periorbital edema, arthritis and a cracked appearance of the radial sides of the fingers of both her hands.
This clinical sign was recognized as mechanic’s hands and a specific search for the presence of antisynthetase
antibodies was performed. She was found to harbor anti-threonyl-tRNA synthetase antibodies. A diagnosis of
antisynthetase syndrome was made and she was treated with glucocorticoids and immunosuppressives.
Conclusions: This case highlights the difficulty in fine-tuning the diagnosis when confronted with a patient with
interstitial lung disease and the suspicion of an underlying, yet undifferentiated connective tissue disease. There is a
strong need for clinical multidisciplinary follow-up of these patients, with a high level of alertness to rare and
specific clinical signs. The diagnosis of the underlying connective tissue disease profoundly influences the
management of the interstitial lung disease. Recent data stress that identification of the autoantibody specificity
allows for further prognostic stratification and therefore should be pursued.
Keywords: Antisynthetase syndrome, Connective tissue diseases, Dermatomyositis, Pulmonary fibrosis

* Correspondence: ellen.delanghe@uzleuven.be
1Department of Rheumatology, University Hospitals Leuven, Herestraat 49,
Leuven 3000, Belgium
Full list of author information is available at the end of the article

© 2015 De Langhe et al.; licensee BioMed Central. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and
reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly credited. The Creative Commons Public Domain
Dedication waiver (http://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/) applies to the data made available in this article,
unless otherwise stated.

De Langhe et al. Journal of Medical Case Reports  (2015) 9:82 

Page 2 of 5

Introduction
Interstitial lung disease (ILD) can occur in the setting of
almost all connective tissue diseases (CTDs). CTD-
associated ILD warrants specific treatment strategies,
based on glucocorticoids and immunosuppressive agents
and confers a better prognosis [1]. The recognition of
the underlying CTD is therefore crucial but is often
hampered and the diagnosis is missed. This can be at-
tributed to various reasons. For one, it is known that
ILD may precede the appearance of typical extrathoracic
CTD features by many years [2]. Furthermore, the initial
presentation of the CTD may be subtle and easily over-
looked when no meticulous long-term multidisciplinary
follow-up is organized. Moreover, many autoantibodies
are rare and not routinely tested, and a negative screen-
ing assay for antinuclear antibodies (ANA) and anti-
histidyl-tRNA synthetase (anti-Jo-1) antibodies may
mislead the treating clinician. We present a case of a
woman, diagnosed with nonspecific interstitial pneumo-
nia (NSIP) with the concurrent suspicion of an under-
lying CTD in 2008, but not meeting classification
criteria for any specific CTD. After four years of stable
disease she presented with sudden pulmonary and sys-
temic deterioration with the appearance of mechanic’s
hands, pointing to a diagnosis of underlying anti-
synthetase syndrome (ASS) and resulting in reorienta-
tion of therapeutic strategies.

Case presentation
In 2008, a 44-year-old Caucasian woman presented to
our pulmonary out-patient clinic with progressive dys-
pnea and cough. She mentioned recent swelling of her
fingers and eyelids. Furthermore, Raynaud’s phenomenon
was present for many years and she complained of a
pruritic rash on the inner side of her right thigh and
widespread arthralgia.

On clinical examination we found bibasilar crackles,
puffy fingers and swollen eyelids. On her right thigh we
observed a discrete macular rash. Pulmonary function
tests noted normal lung volumes and a reduced diffusion
capacity: forced vital capacity (FVC) 85%; forced expira-
tory volume in 1 second (FEV1) 85%; carbon monoxide
diffusion capacity (DLCO) 46%. High-resolution com-
puted tomography (HRCT) demonstrated ground-glass
opacities in both lung bases, with limited honeycombing,
compatible with NSIP (Figure 1). Bronchoalveolar lavage
(BAL) analysis revealed increased cellularity (37.04×106
cells/microliter) with increased lymphocyte (25.6%) and
eosinophil count (12.4%). Laboratory analysis noted mild
inflammation (C-reactive protein, CRP, 12mg/L), normal
liver tests and a normal creatine kinase level. ANA were
negative and no anticytoplasmic staining was detected
on indirect immunofluorescence (IIF). Rheumatoid fac-
tor and anti-cyclic citrullinated protein antibodies were

Figure 1 High-resolution computed tomography image. Image
compatible with nonspecific interstitial pneumonia showing ground-
glass opacities in both lung bases.

negative. No specific search for the presence of antisynthe-
tase antibodies was performed. Capillaroscopy showed only
aspecific findings with two megacapillaries, insufficient
for a diagnosis of systemic sclerosis.

She was diagnosed with NSIP with a high suspicion of
an underlying CTD, because of the presence of Raynaud’s
phenomenon, puffy fingers, a NSIP pattern on HRCT and
the lymphocytic BAL formula. However, the absence of
ANA and the absence of a clear signature on capillaro-
scopy led to the diagnosis of undifferentiated CTD
(UCTD).

She was monitored with regular clinical,

laboratory,
radiological and lung function evaluations. All parame-
ters remained stable for four years. Suddenly, she pre-
sented with progressive dyspnea,
fever, night sweats,
weight loss, myalgia and muscle weakness, arthralgia,
swollen eyelids and cracked fingers (Figure 2). A clinical
examination revealed a febrile, discrete hypotensive and
tachycardic patient (39°C, blood pressure 101/57mmHg,
pulse rate 101 beats per minute). We noted a heliotropic
rash, polyarthritis of hand proximal
interphalangeal
joints as well as proximal and distal muscular weakness
and tenderness. The skin on the radial side of her first
to third fingers of both hands appeared hyperkeratotic
and cracked, compatible with mechanic’s hands. La-
boratory analysis documented severe inflammation
(erythrocyte sedimentation rate 112mm/hour, CRP
192.2mg/L) and elevated creatine kinase levels (713U/L,
normal <=145U/L). IIF showed a negative ANA and a
positive anticytoplasmic signal (titer 1/640). Her blood

De Langhe et al. Journal of Medical Case Reports  (2015) 9:82 

Page 3 of 5

and a reported prevalence of pericarditis of 20 to 50%
[4,5] and gastrointestinal involvement (esophageal dysfunc-
tion). Antisynthetase antibodies are aminoacyl-transfer
RNA synthetase (ARS) antibodies, directed against the
enzymes that attach dedicated amino acids to their
cognate transfer ribonucleic acid (tRNA in the process
of polypeptide synthesis. Theoretically, ARS could be
targeting synthetases for all 20 existing amino acids.
However, to date, only eight different ARS have been
identified, of which anti-Jo-1 is the most prevalent,
comprising two-thirds of identified ARS antibodies [6].
Others are less frequent and include anti-alanyl-tRNA
synthetase (anti-PL12), anti-PL7, anti-isoleucyl-tRNA
synthetase, anti-glycyl-tRNA synthetase, anti-asparaginyl-
tRNA synthetase, anti-phenylalanyl-tRNA synthetase
and anti-tyrosyl-tRNA synthetase [7]. Detection of
these antibodies is crucial. Routine ANA testing is based
on IIF and will often remain negative in patients with
ASS. ARS antibodies are directed against cytoplasmic
antigens and their presence is often suggested, albeit
nonspecific, by an anticytoplasmic signal on IIF. The
detection of anti-Jo-1 antibodies is performed by a com-
mercially available immunoassay. However, the identifica-
tion of other ARS antibodies classically requires protein
and RNA immunoprecipitation techniques that are not
routinely performed in all laboratories and often need a
specific inquiry from the treating clinician [7]. Currently,
commercial
immunodot techniques are available for
detection of some ARS, such as anti-PL12 and anti-
PL7 antibodies.

The high prevalence of ILD in patients carrying ARS
and the need for specific immunosuppressive treat-
ment emphasizes the need for timely detection of this
clinical syndrome. This is however often severely ham-
pered by the variable time relation between the onset
of ILD and the onset of myositis or other ASS-specific
features. ILD can precede (10 to 30%), concur (53 to
70%) or follow (6 to 20%) the onset of myositis [4,5].
Organized multidisciplinary follow-up by both pulmo-
nologists and rheumatologists increases the alertness
for subtle clinical signs suggesting an underlying ASS.

When faced with a patient with an ASS, the identifica-
tion of the underlying ARS antibody specificity is relevant.
Increasing recent evidence supports clinical heterogeneity
between anti-Jo-1 and non-Jo-1 positive patients with dif-
ferences in presenting symptoms and prognosis. On the
one hand, anti-Jo-1 positive patients more frequently
present with muscle and joint involvement with more se-
vere and treatment-resistant myositis. Non-Jo-1 positive
patients on the other hand often present with non-
myositis CTD symptoms (Raynaud, cutaneous changes,
constitutional symptoms) and pulmonary manifesta-
tions [3-5,8]. Anti-PL7 and anti-PL12 positive patients
cluster together with a 98% prevalence of ILD and even

Figure 2 Mechanic’s hands. Cracking and hyperkeratosis of the
radial surface of digits one to three.

and urine cultures were negative. A chest radiograph
showed no evidence for an intercurrent infection. Elec-
tromyography studies were compatible with severe my-
opathy in both proximal and distal muscle groups.
Pulmonary function tests revealed severe restriction and
severely decreased diffusion capacity (FVC 44%; FEV1
40%; DLCO 31%). A transthoracic echocardiogram
showed normal right and left ventricular function with
an estimated ejection fraction of 60%. A small pericar-
dial effusion was present (maximal end-diastolic diam-
eter 5mm) without hemodynamic effect. Systolic arteria
pulmonalis pressure estimate was 45mmHg. Cardiac
magnetic resonance imaging demonstrated discrete
contrast enhancement in the basal septum, compatible
with previous myocarditis.

This clinical picture was compatible with an ASS and
urged the search for antisynthetase antibodies. Anti-Jo-
1 antibodies were negative, but more specific testing
(immunodot technique, Alphadia, Belgium) revealed the
presence of anti-threonyl-tRNA synthetase (anti-PL7)
antibodies. She was treated with high-dose glucocorti-
coids
(1mg/kg methylprednisolone with a tapering
scheme) in combination with mycophenolate-mofetil.
This resulted in normalization of her creatine kinase
levels and stabilization of pulmonary function tests.

Discussion
ASS is a clinical entity characterized by ILD, inflamma-
tory myopathy, arthritis, Raynaud’s phenomenon, fever,
mechanic’s hands and the presence of antisynthetase
antibodies. The clinical feature of mechanic’s hands is
characterized by erythematous and fissured hyperkera-
tosis on the palmar or lateral aspect of the fingers. It is
considered a highly specific clinical sign, present in 28%
of patients carrying antisynthetase antibodies [3]. Other
features include cardiac involvement, with myocarditis

De Langhe et al. Journal of Medical Case Reports  (2015) 9:82 

Page 4 of 5

isolated ILD in 62%. The behavior of anti-PL7 and anti-
PL12 positive patients is substantially different from
anti-Jo-1 positive patients (ILD in 78%) [9], a finding
that is shared in other reports [10,11]. Identification of
the ARS antibody allows for prognostic stratification.
Recent reports indicate that non-Jo-1 positive patients
have decreased survival compared to anti-Jo-1 positive
patients (5- and 10-year unadjusted survival of 90% and
70% in anti-Jo-1 positive patients, and 75% and 47% in
non-Jo-1 positive patients) [8]. In conclusion, anti-PL7
positive patients have a prevalence of ILD of 90 to
100%, with a high prevalence of isolated ILD at presen-
tation,
lower frequency of myositis with a better re-
sponse to therapy, and an overall poorer prognosis
compared to anti-Jo-1 positive patients.

We feel that this case is an excellent example to high-
light the relevance of an underlying UCTD in a patient
presenting with ILD. The presence of CTD features
(sicca syndrome, Raynaud’s phenomenon, cutaneous or
musculoskeletal symptoms) in a patient with ILD should
urge the clinician for further research, especially in the
presence of a radiological or histopathological NSIP pat-
tern, female gender or younger age. The diagnosis of
UCTD can be made in patients presenting with at least
one CTD feature and the presence of autoantibodies or
systemic inflammation, but not fulfilling the preset clas-
sification criteria for a definite CTD. ILD in a patient
with UCTD can be considered “lung-dominant CTD”, a
concept that was introduced by Fischer et al. [12] and
defined as ILD with: (1) a histopathological or radio-
logical pattern of NSIP, usual
interstitial pneumonia,
lymphocytic interstitial pneumonia, organizing pneu-
monia or diffuse alveolar damage; (2) insufficient extra-
thoracic features for a definite CTD diagnosis; (3) no
other available etiology for the interstitial pneumonia;
and (4) the presence of any of a listed set of autoanti-
bodies or two out of four histopathological features on
lung biopsy (lymphoid aggregates with germinal centers,
extensive pleuritis, prominent plasmocytic infiltration
and dense perivascular collagen). Specific interest has
also gone to patients with ILD and the presence of auto-
antibodies without any CTD feature. Patients with usual
interstitial pneumonia (UIP) and the presence of auto-
antibodies have more ground-glass opacities, more ex-
tensive ILD and more honeycombing, but
identical
survival compared to patients with autoantibody-negative
UIP [13]. When compared to healthy controls, patients
with autoantibody-positive idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis
have identical autoantibody profiles, suggesting that these
are antibodies of unknown significance in the ageing
patient, without a clear clinical impact [14].

In general, clinicians should be alert for an under-
lying CTD in patients presenting with ILD. The diag-
nosis of UCTD or lung-dominant CTD should be

suspected in a patient with ILD and the presence of
one CTD feature and the presence of autoantibodies,
as UCTD can evolve into full-blown CTD during the
course of follow-up.

Conclusions
With this case we want to highlight the fact that the first
pulmonary presentation may precede the full-blown
CTD picture by many years. This can hamper and delay
a final diagnosis and treatment. There is a crucial need
for meticulous collaborative follow-up by pulmonolo-
gists and rheumatologists in patients with suspected
“lung-dominant CTD”. Furthermore this case empha-
sizes the need to consider ASS in patients with ILD and
UCTD, and to screen for ARS antibodies, particularly in
features (mechanic’s
the presence of
hands), a negative ANA and a positive anticytoplasmic
signal.

typical clinical

Consent
Written informed consent was obtained from the patient
for publication of this case report and accompanying
images. A copy of the written consent is available for
review by the Editor-in-Chief of this journal.

Abbreviations
ANA: Antinuclear antibodies; Anti-Jo-1: Anti-histidyl-tRNA synthetase;
Anti-PL7: Anti-threonyl-tRNA synthetase; Anti-PL12: Anti-alanyl-tRNA
synthetase; ARS: Aminoacyl-transfer RNA synthetase; ASS: Antisynthetase
syndrome; BAL: Bronchoalveolar lavage; CRP: C-reactive protein;
CTD: Connective tissue disease; DLCO: Carbon monoxide diffusion capacity;
FEV1: Forced expiratory volume in 1 second; FVC: Forced vital capacity;
HRCT: High-resolution computed tomography; IIF: Indirect immunofluorescence;
ILD: Interstitial lung disease; NSIP: Nonspecific interstitial pneumonia;
tRNA: Transfer ribonucleic acid; UCTD: Undifferentiated connective tissue disease;
UIP: Usual interstitial pneumonia.

Competing interests
The authors declare that they have no competing interests.

Authors’ contributions
EDL, JL, WW and RW participated in the design and the draft of the
manuscript. XB was responsible for the immunoassays. All authors read and
approved the final manuscript.

Author details
1Department of Rheumatology, University Hospitals Leuven, Herestraat 49,
Leuven 3000, Belgium. 2Department of Laboratory Medicine, University
Hospitals Leuven, Herestraat 49, Leuven 3000, Belgium. 3Department of
Pulmonary Medicine, University Hospitals Leuven, Herestraat 49, Leuven
3000, Belgium.

Received: 3 November 2014 Accepted: 12 March 2015

References
1.

Park JH, Kim DS, Park IN, Jang SJ, Kitaichi M, Nicholson AG, et al. Prognosis
of fibrotic interstitial pneumonia: idiopathic versus collagen vascular
disease-related subtypes. Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2007;175:705–11.
Tillie-Leblond I, Wislez M, Valeyre D, Crestani B, Rabbat A, Israel-Biet D, et al.
Interstitial lung disease and anti-Jo-1 antibodies: difference between acute
and gradual onset. Thorax. 2008;63:53–9.
Lega JC, Fabien N, Reynaud Q, Durieu I, Durupt S, Dutertre M, et al. The clinical
phenotype associated with myositis-specific and associated

2.

3.

De Langhe et al. Journal of Medical Case Reports  (2015) 9:82 

Page 5 of 5

4.

autoantibodies: a meta-analysis revisiting the so-called antisynthetase
syndrome. Autoimmun Rev. 2014;13(9):883–91.
Labirua-Iturburu A, Selva-O’Callaghan A, Vincze M, Danko K, Vencovsky J,
Fisher B, et al. Anti-PL-7 (anti-threonyl-tRNA synthetase) antisynthetase
syndrome: clinical manifestations in a series of patients from a European
multicenter study (EUMYONET) and review of the literature. Medicine
(Baltimore). 2012;91:206–11.

5. Marie I, Josse S, Decaux O, Diot E, Landron C, Roblot P, et al. Clinical

manifestations and outcome of anti-PL7 positive patients with
antisynthetase syndrome. Eur J Intern Med. 2013;24:474–9.
Hervier B, Benveniste O. Clinical heterogeneity and outcomes of
antisynthetase syndrome. Curr Rheumatol Rep. 2013;15:349.

6.

8.

7. Mahler M, Miller FW, Fritzler MJ. Idiopathic inflammatory myopathies and
the anti-synthetase syndrome: a comprehensive review. Autoimmun Rev.
2014;13:367–71.
Aggarwal R, Cassidy E, Fertig N, Koontz DC, Lucas M, Ascherman DP, et al.
Patients with non-Jo-1 anti-tRNA-synthetase autoantibodies have worse
survival than Jo-1 positive patients. Ann Rheum Dis. 2014;73:227–32.
Hervier B, Devilliers H, Stanciu R, Meyer A, Uzunhan Y, Masseau A, et al.
Hierarchical cluster and survival analyses of antisynthetase syndrome:
phenotype and outcome are correlated with anti-tRNA synthetase antibody
specificity. Autoimmun Rev. 2012;12:210–7.

9.

10. Marie I, Josse S, Decaux O, Dominique S, Diot E, Landron C, et al.

Comparison of long-term outcome between anti-Jo1- and anti-PL7/PL12
positive patients with antisynthetase syndrome. Autoimmun Rev.
2012;11:739–45.

11. Hervier B, Uzunhan Y, Hachulla E, Benveniste O, Nunes H, Delaval P, et al.

12.

13.

14.

Antisynthetase syndrome positive for anti-threonyl-tRNA synthetase
(anti-PL7) antibodies. Eur Respir J. 2011;37:714–7.
Fischer A, du Bois R. Interstitial lung disease in connective tissue disorders.
Lancet. 2012;380:689–98.
Song JW, Do KH, Kim MY, Jang SJ, Colby TV, Kim DS. Pathologic and
radiologic differences between idiopathic and collagen vascular
disease-related usual interstitial pneumonia. Chest. 2009;136:23–30.
Lee JS, Kim EJ, Lynch KL, Elicker B, Ryerson CJ, Katsumoto TR, et al.
Prevalence and clinical significance of circulating autoantibodies in
idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis. Respir Med. 2013;107:249–55.

Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central
and take full advantage of: 

• Convenient online submission

• Thorough peer review

• No space constraints or color ﬁgure charges

• Immediate publication on acceptance

• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar

• Research which is freely available for redistribution

Submit your manuscript at 
www.biomedcentral.com/submit

