Rodrigo et al. Journal of Medical Case Reports  (2015) 9:93 
DOI 10.1186/s13256-015-0574-z

JOURNAL OF MEDICAL
CASE REPORTS

CA SE R EP O R T
Open Access
Therapeutic limited bronchoalveolar lavage with
fiberoptic bronchoscopy as a bridging procedure
prior to total lung lavage in a patient with
pulmonary alveolar proteinosis: a case report
Damith Rodrigo*, Amila Rathnapala and Wijitha Senaratne

Abstract

Introduction: Therapeutic total lung lavage under general anesthesia is the current mainstay of treatment for
pulmonary alveolar proteinosis, which is a rare lung disease characterized by alveolar accumulation of surfactant.
Therapeutic limited bronchoalveolar lavage is considered an alternative treatment to conventional total lung lavage.
Case presentation: A 61-year-old, previously healthy, Sri Lankan Moor woman presented to our facility with
progressively worsening difficulty in breathing and persistent dry cough for one year. Her respiratory examination
revealed bibasal fine end-inspiratory crepitations. A chest radiograph showed bilateral mid and lower zone alveolar
interstitial shadows and a high-resolution computed tomography scan of her chest revealed septal thickening with
ground-glass shadows more on mid and lower zones bilaterally. A diagnostic bronchoalveolar lavage fluid analysis
revealed diastase-resistant protein clumps in periodic acid Schiff stain. The diagnosis was made as pulmonary alveolar
proteinosis. An arterial blood gas analysis performed prior to intervention revealed a significant hypoxia (partial pressure
of oxygen - 64mmHg) with alveolar-arterial gradient was 35.4mmHg. Therapeutic limited bronchoalveolar lavage was
arranged and her right and her left lung were lavaged separately in two sessions done two weeks apart under local
anesthesia. Our patient had significant clinical improvement and resolution of the bilateral septal thickening with
minimal resolution of the ground-glass opacities in a repeat high-resolution computed tomography scan done two
weeks later. Subsequently, a total lung lavage under general anesthesia was also done, which improved her dyspnea
and arterial hypoxemia.
Conclusions: Therapeutic limited bronchoalveolar lavage can be successfully performed as an interval bridging
procedure, as a ‘prewash’, prior to conventional total lung lavage for pulmonary alveolar proteinosis.
Keywords: Pulmonary alveolar proteinosis, Total lung lavage, Therapeutic limited bronchoalveolar lavage

Introduction
Pulmonary alveolar proteinosis (PAP) is a rare lung dis-
ease characterized by alveolar accumulation of surfac-
tant. Three main categories of PAP have been described,
depending on the etiology, as autoimmune (primary or
idiopathic), secondary and genetic. The disease was first
described by Rosen et al. in 1958 [1]. Although not specific,
high-resolution computed tomography (HRCT) shows a
characteristic ‘crazy-paving’ pattern. Bronchoalveolar lavage
(BAL)
is

fluid analysis for periodic acid Schiff

(PAS)

considered diagnostic. The current mainstay of treatment is
therapeutic total lung lavage under general anesthesia in a
surgical theater [2]. In case expertise with whole lung lavage
is not available, such patients must be referred early to a
center with facilities for total lung lavage. Another possible
alternative treatment is multiple segmental or lobar lavage
by fiberoptic bronchoscopy (FOB) under local anesthesia,
which has been reported only in few cases in the literature
[3,4]. We report our experience with limited BAL by FOB
done as a bridging procedure in a patient with PAP prior to
a total lung lavage.

* Correspondence: damith_rodrigo@yahoo.com
National Hospital for Respiratory Diseases, Welisara, Sri Lanka

© 2015 Rodrigo et al.; licensee BioMed Central. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and
reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly credited. The Creative Commons Public Domain
Dedication waiver (http://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/) applies to the data made available in this article,
unless otherwise stated.

Rodrigo et al. Journal of Medical Case Reports  (2015) 9:93 

Page 2 of 4

Case presentation
A 61-year-old, married, previously healthy Sri Lankan
Moor woman was presented to our facility with pro-
gressively worsening difficulty in breathing (modified
Medical Research Council (mMRC) dyspnea scale grade
3) and persistent dry cough for one year without any his-
tory suggestive of cardiac failure. She denied chronic
exposure to either organic or inorganic dust. She had no
history of arthritis or connective tissues disease. Her re-
spiratory examination revealed bilateral, bibasal
fine
end-inspiratory crepitations. A chest radiograph revealed
bilateral mid and lower zone alveolar interstitial shadows
(Figure 1). A HRCT scan of her chest showed septal
thickening with ground-glass shadows more on bilateral
mid and lower zones (Figure 2A). Our patient had no
significant past history of cardiac illness, however, two-
dimensional echocardiography was arranged and it re-
vealed no underlying cardiac dysfunction. Her hemoglobin
level was 14.5g/dL with a total
leukocyte count of
9.7×109/L and platelet count of 343×109/L. Her renal
function and liver function tests were normal. A pulmon-
ary function test was arranged but our patient could not
perform the test properly due to her symptoms. However,
her six-minute walk test revealed a drop in saturation
from 97% to 88% after walking 1,300 feet. A diagnostic
BAL fluid analysis was carried out and it yielded a pale-
yellow turbid fluid. The cytology revealed diastase-
resistant protein clumps in PAS stain and was consistent
with pulmonary alveolar proteinosis. The diagnosis was
made as pulmonary alveolar proteinosis based on the evi-
dence from the HRCT and positive BAL fluid cytology for
PAS stain. She was investigated for an underlying cause

Figure 1 Chest radiograph on admission showing bilateral mid and
lower zone alveolar interstitial shadows.

and her serum immunoglobulins were within normal limits
and retroviral screening was negative. Her rheumatoid fac-
tor and antinuclear antibodies (ANA) were normal. Her
serum protein electrophoresis was also normal. An anti-
granulocyte macrophage colony-stimulating factor (GM-
CSF) antibody test was not performed since it was not
available in the local setting.

Our patient was prepared for a therapeutic BAL and
an arterial blood gas analysis was performed prior to the
procedure, which revealed a significant hypoxia (partial
pressure of oxygen (PaO2) - 64mmHg) while breathing
room air. The alveolar-arterial gradient was 35.4mmHg.
Therapeutic BAL was performed under local anesthesia
without any sedation or analgesia. Local anesthesia with
2% lignocaine was given through the broncoscope as
and when needed during the procedure. Our patient was
connected to a pulse oxymeter and saturation was moni-
tored throughout the procedure. One hundred percent
oxygen 5L/min was used toward the latter part of the
procedure when the oxygen saturation dropped below
88%. The right lung was chosen to be lavaged in the first
session. A bronchoscope was passed through the right
nostril and was wedged in a segmental bronchus of right
upper lobe. Warm saline solution was instilled via a
syringe in 50mL aliquots into each segment of the re-
spective lobes (right upper, middle and lower) and was
removed by suction into a plastic trap bottle. Small
aliquots of 50mL were used for each segment and
altogether 500mL warm saline was used for her entire
right lung. The procedure lasted about 1hr and was
stopped when the returning fluid became clear and our
patient could no longer tolerate the discomfort. The
chest radiograph that was performed 48hrs following the
procedure revealed significant resolution of the alveolar
interstitial opacities in the right lung. After two weeks,
we repeated the same procedure on her left lung. Fol-
lowing both procedures, our patient was observed
closely in an intensive care unit for few hours but in
both situations the post procedure period was unevent-
ful. A HRCT chest scan was repeated two weeks after
the second lavage and was compared with the HRCT
done at the beginning (Figure 2B). It showed significant
resolution of the bilateral septal thickening with minimal
resolution of
the ground-glass opacities. An arterial
blood gas analysis revealed improvement of hypoxia
(PaO2 - 80mmHg). Our patient had significant clinical
improvement with improvement
in dyspnea (mMRC
dyspnea scale grade 0 to 1) and her six-minute walk test
also showed less desaturation with improvement in walk
distance (1,600 feet) compared to the test done prior to
the lavage. Although our patient had good clinical
improvement following the procedure, the radiological
improvement was minimal. Therefore, we decided to
subject her to total lung lavage under general anesthesia.

Rodrigo et al. Journal of Medical Case Reports  (2015) 9:93 

Page 3 of 4

Figure 2 High-resolution computed tomography scans. (a) A high-resolution computed tomography scan of the chest (before the lavage)
showing septal thickening with ground-glass shadows more on bilateral mid and lower zones. (b) A high-resolution computed tomography scan
of the chest (after the lavage) showing significant resolution of the bilateral septal thickening with minimal resolution of ground-glass opacities.

Discussion
lung lavage is considered to be the
Therapeutic total
gold standard treatment for PAP [2]. It should be per-
formed under general anesthesia in a surgical theater.
The endotracheal tube needs to be frequently checked
and adjusted during the procedure by an experienced

anesthetist. It requires at least three to four hours of the-
ater time and a lot of manpower. Further to this, the
major adverse effect of total lung lavage under general
anesthesia is hypoxemia, especially toward the end of
the procedure, which requires a postoperative care facil-
ity. More importantly, the patient has to be medically fit

Rodrigo et al. Journal of Medical Case Reports  (2015) 9:93 

Page 4 of 4

enough to undergo general anesthesia. It is often impos-
sible to perform therapeutic total lung lavage in most
patients who are newly diagnosed as PAP due to these
potential complications and since the patients are usu-
ally hypoxemic and in poor clinical condition. In such
cases, multiple segmental or lobar lavage by FOB has
been reported as a possible alternative to whole lung
lavage [3,4].

2.

3.

4.

Ramirez J, Nyka W, McLaughlin J. Pulmonary alveolar proteinosis: diagnostic
techniques and observations. N Engl J Med. 1963;268:165–71.
Cheng SL, Chang HT, Lau HP, Lee LN, Yang PC. Pulmonary alveolar
proteinosis: treatment by bronchofiberscopic lobar lavage. Chest.
2002;122:1480–5.
Firat ND, Çiledağ A, Kabalak PA, Karnak D, Meco BC, Alanoğlu Z, et al.
Pulmonary alveolar proteinosis and successful therapy with combined
lavage procedures: case reports. Exp Ther Med. 2011;2:569–73.

limited BAL under

Our patient underwent

local
anesthesia in a bronchoscopy suite using an ordinary
fiberoptic bronchoscope as a bridging procedure prior to
conventional total lung lavage under general anesthesia.
This procedure did not
require general anesthesia,
double-lumen endotracheal tube replacements or pro-
longed intensive care facility. Moreover it was safe and
our patient remained hemodynamically stable through-
out the procedure. This procedure showed that limited
lavage can be used as a ‘prewash’ prior to conventional
‘total
in patients with PAP. Furthermore,
this can be used a procedure for preparing the patient
for conventional total lung lavage.

lung lavage’

Conclusions
In conclusion,
limited BAL can be successfully per-
formed as an interval bridging procedure, as a ‘prewash’,
prior to conventional total lung lavage for PAP.

Consent
Written informed consent was obtained from the patient
for publication of this case report and accompanying
images. A copy of the written consent is available for
review by the Editor-in-Chief of this journal.

Abbreviations
ANA: antinuclear antibodies; BAL: bronchoalveolar lavage; FOB: fiberoptic
bronchoscopy; GM-CSF: granulocyte macrophage-colony stimulating factor;
HRCT: high-resolution computed tomography; mMRC: modified Medical
Research Council; PaO2: partial pressure of oxygen; PAP: pulmonary alveolar
proteinosis; PAS: periodic acid Schiff.

Competing interests
The authors declare that they have no competing interests.

Authors’ contributions
DR, AR and WS were involved actively in the management of the patient.
DR drafted the manuscript. All the others provided valuable inputs and
guidance during the preparation of the manuscript. All authors read and
approved the final manuscript.

Acknowledgements
We are grateful to Dr R Constantine for analyzing the bronchoalveolar lavage
fluid for periodic acid Schiff and Dr P Chandrasena for reporting the high-
resolution computed tomography.

Received: 25 December 2014 Accepted: 18 March 2015

References
1.

Rosen SH, Castleman B, Liebow AA. Pulmonary alveolar proteinosis. N Engl J
Med. 1958;258:1123–42.

Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central
and take full advantage of: 

• Convenient online submission

• Thorough peer review

• No space constraints or color ﬁgure charges

• Immediate publication on acceptance

• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar

• Research which is freely available for redistribution

Submit your manuscript at 
www.biomedcentral.com/submit

